anyone spoke to him mingled a too polite disbelief with its
expectancy. His [stiff] coarse brownish hair was combed high off his
forehead but there was little order in its arrangement. [The face] A
girl might or might not have called him handsome: the face was regular
in feature and its pose was almost softened into [positive distinct]
beauty by a small feminine mouth. In [the] a general survey of the
face the eyes were not prominent: they were small light blue eyes
which checked advances. They were quite fresh and fearless but in
spite of this the face was to a certain extent the face of a
debauchee.
  The president of the college was a sequestrated person who took the
chair at reunions and inaugural meetings of societies. His visible
lieutenants were a dean and a bursar. The bursar, Stephen thought,
fitted his title: a heavy, florid man with a black-grey cap of hair.
He performed his duties with great unction and was often to be seen
looming in the hall watching the coming and going of the students. He
insisted on punctuality: a minute or so late once or twice -- he would
not mind that so much; he would clap his hands and make some cheery
reproof. But what made him severe was a few minutes lost every day: it
disturbed the proper working of the classes. Stephen was nearly always
more than a quarter of an hour late and [so] when he arrived the
bursar had usually gone back to his office. One morning, however, he
arrived at the school earlier than usual. Walking up the stone steps
before him was a fat [young] student, a very hard-working, timorous
young man with a bread-and-jam complexion. The bursar was standing in
the hall with his arms folded across [the] his chest and when he
caught sight of the fat young man he looked significantly at the
clock. It was eight minutes past eleven.
  --Now then, Moloney, you know this won't do. Eight minutes late!
Disturbing your class like that -- we can't have that, you know. Must
be in sharp for lecture every morning in future.
  The jam overspread the bread in Moloney's face as he stumbled over
some excuses about a clock being wrong and then scurried upstairs to
his class. Stephen delayed a little [while] time hanging up his
overcoat while the large priest eyed him solemnly. Then he turned his
head quietly towards the bursar and said
  --Fine morning, sir.
  The bursar at once clapped his hands and rubbed them together and
clapped them together again. The beauty of the morning and the
appositeness of the remark both struck him at the same time and he
answered cheerily:
  --Beautiful! Fine bracing morning now! and he fell to rubbing his
hands again.
  One morning [he] Stephen arrived three quarters of an hour late and
he thought it his decenter plan to wait till the French lecture should
begin. As he was leaning over the banisters, waiting for the twelve
o'clock bell to ring a young man began to ascend the winding-stairs
slowly. At a few steps from the landing he halted and turned a square
rustic face towards Stephen.
  --Is this the way to the Matriculation class, if you please, he
asked in a brogue accenting the first syllable of Matriculation.
  Stephen directed him and the two young men began to talk.
The new student was named Madden and came from the county of Limerick.
His manner without being exactly diffident was a little scared and he
seemed grateful for Stephen's attentions. After the French lecture the
two walked across the green together and Stephen brought the newcomer
into the National Library. Madden took off his hat at the turnstile
and as he leaned on the counter to fill up the docket for his book
Stephen remarked the peasant strength of his jaws.
  The dean of the college was professor of English, Father Butt. He
was reputed the most able man in the college: he was a philosopher and
a scholar. He had read a series of papers at a total abstinence club
to prove that Shakespeare was a Roman Catholic: he had also written
against another Jesuit father who had very late in life been converted
to the Baconian theory of the authorship of the plays. Father Butt had
always his hands full of papers and his soutane very soiled with
chalk. He was an elderly greyhound of a man and his vocal ligaments,
like his garb, seemed to be coated with chalk. He had a plausible
manner with everyone and was particularly -- 

                      [Text Missing]

of verse are the first conditions which the words must submit to, the
rhythm is the esthetic result of the senses, values and relations of
the words thus conditioned. The beauty of verse consisted as much in
the concealment as in the revelation of construction but it certainly
could not proceed from only one of these. For this reason he found
Father Butt's reading of verse and a schoolgirl's accurate reading of
verse intolerable. Verse to be read according to its rhythm should be
read according to the stresses; that is, neither strictly according to
the feet nor yet with complete disregard of them. All this theory he
set himself to explain to Maurice and Maurice, when he had understood
the meanings of the terms and had put these meanings carefully
together, agreed that Stephen's theory was the right one. There was
only one possible way of rendering the first quatrain of Byron's poem:

        My days are in the yellow leaf
        The flowers and fruits of love are gone
        The worm, the canker and the grief
        Are mine alone.

The two brothers tried this theory on all the verse they could
remember and it yielded wonderful results. Soon Stephen began to
explore the language for himself and to choose, and thereby rescue
once for all, the words and phrases most amenable to his theory. a He
became a poet with malice aforethought.
  He was at once captivated by the seeming eccentricities of the prose
of Freeman and William Morris. He read them as one would read a
thesaurus and made a garner of words. He read Skeat's <Etymological
Dictionary> by the hour and his mind, which had from the first been
only too submissive to the infant sense of wonder, was often
hypnotised by the most commonplace conversation. People seemed to him
strangely ignorant of the value of the words they used so glibly. And
pace by pace as this indignity of life forced itself upon him he
became enamoured of an idealising, a more veritably human tradition.
The phenomenon seemed to him a grave one and he began to see that
people had leagued themselves together in a conspiracy of ignobility
and that Destiny had scornfully reduced her prices for them. He
desired no such reduction for himself and preferred to serve her on
the ancient terms.
  There was a special class for English composition and it was in this
class that Stephen first made his name. The English essay was for him
the one serious work of the week. His essay was usually very long and
the professor, who was a leader-writer on the <Freeman's Journal>,
always kept it for the last. Stephen's style of writing, [that] though
it was over affectionate towards the antique and even the obsolete and
too easily rhetorical, was remarkable for a certain crude originality
of expression. He gave himself no great trouble to sustain the
boldnesses which were expressed or implied in his essays. He threw
them out as sudden defence-works while he was busy constructing the
enigma of a manner. For the youth had been apprised of another crisis
and he wished to make ready for the shock of it. On account of such
manoeuvres he came to be regarded as a very unequilibrated [youth]
young man who took more interest than young men usually take in
theories which might be permitted as pastimes. Father Butt, to whom
the emergence of these unusual qualities had been duly reported, spoke
one day to Stephen with the purpose of 'sounding' him. Father Butt
expressed a great admiration for Stephen's essays all of which, he
said, the professor of English composition had shown him. He
encouraged the youth and suggested that in a short time perhaps he
might contribute something to one of the Dublin papers or magazines.
Stephen found this encouragement kindly meant but mistaken and he
launched forth into a copious explanation of his theories. Father Butt
listened and, even more readily than [Stephen] Maurice had done,
agreed with them all. Stephen laid down his doctrine very positively
and insisted on the importance of what he called the literary
tradition. Words, he said, have a certain value in the literary
tradition and a certain value in the market-place -- a debased value.
Words are simply receptacles for human thought: in the literary
tradition they receive more valuable thoughts than they receive in the
market-place. Father Butt listened to all this, rubbing his chalky
hand often over his chin and nodding his head and said that Stephen
evidently understood the importance of tradition. Stephen quoted a
phrase from Newman to illustrate his theory.
  --In that sentence of Newman's, he said, the word is used according
to the literary tradition: it has there its full value. In ordinary
use, that is, in the market-place, it has a different value
altogether, a debased value. "I hope I'm not detaining you."
  --Not at all! not at all!
  --No, no . . .
  --Yes, yes, Mr Daedalus, I see . . . I quite see your point . . .
detain . . .
  The very morning after this Father Butt returned Stephen's monologue
in kind. It was a raw nipping morning and when Stephen, who had
arrived too late for the Latin lecture, strolled into the Physics
Theatre he discovered Father Butt kneeling on the hearthstone engaged
in lighting a small fire in the huge grate. He was making neat wisps
of paper and carefully disposing them among the coals and sticks. All
the while he kept up a little patter explaining his operations and at
a crisis he produced from the most remote pockets of his chalkey
soutane three dirty candle-butts. These he thrust in different
openings and then looked up at Stephen with an air of triumph. He set
a match to a few projecting pieces of paper and in a few minutes the
coals had caught.
  --There is an art, Mr Daedalus, in lighting a fire.
  --So I see, sir. A very useful art.
  --That's it: a useful art. We have the useful arts and we have the
liberal arts.
  Father Butt after this statement got up from the hearthstone and
went away about some other business leaving Stephen to watch the
kindling fire and Stephen brooded upon the fast melting candle-butts
and on the reproach of the priest's manner till it was time for the
Physics lecture to begin.
  The problem could not be solved out of hand but the artistic part of
it at least presented no difficulties. In reading through 'Twelfth
Night' for the class Father Butt skipped the two songs of the clown
without a word and when Stephen, determined on forcing them on his
attention, asked very gravely whether they were to be learned by heart
or not Father Butt said it was improbable such a question would be on
the paper:
  --The clown sings these songs for the duke. It was a custom at that
time for noblemen to have clowns to sing to them . . . for amusement.
  He took 'Othello' more seriously and made the class take a note of
the moral of the play: an object-lesson in the passion of jealousy.
Shakespeare, he said, had sounded the depths of human nature: his
plays show us men and women under the influence of various passions
and they show us the moral result of these passions. We see the
conflict of these human passions and our own passions are purified by
the spectacle. The dramas of Shakespeare have a distinct moral force
and 'Othello' is one of the greatest of tragedies. Stephen trained
himself to hear all this out without moving hand or foot but at the
same time he was amused to learn that the president had refused to
allow two of the boarders to go to a performance of 'Othello' at the
Gaiety Theatre on the ground that there were many coarse expressions
in the play.
  The monster in Stephen had lately taken to misbehaving himself and
on the least provocation was ready for bloodshed. Almost every
incident of the day was a goad for him and the intellect had great
trouble keeping him within bounds. But the episode of religious
fervour which was fast becoming a memory had resulted in a certain
outward self-control which was now found to be very useful. Besides
this Stephen was quick enough to see that he must disentangle his
affairs in secrecy and reserve had ever been a light penance for him.
His reluctance to debate scandal, to seem impolitely curious of
others, aided him in his real indictment and was not without a
satisfactory flavour of the heroic. Already while that fever-fit of
holiness lay upon him, he had encountered but out of charity had
declined to penetrate disillusioning forces. These shocks had driven
him from breathless flights of zeal shamefully inwards and the most
that devotional exercises could do for him was to soothe him. This
soothing he badly needed for he suffered greatly from contact with his
new environment. He hardly spoke to his colleagues and performed the
business of the class without remark or interest. Every morning he
rose and came down to breakfast. After breakfast he took the tram for
town, settling himself on the front seat outside with his face to the
wind. He got down off the tram at Amiens St Station instead of going
on to the Pillar because he wished to partake in the morning life of
the city. This morning walk was pleasant for him and there was no face
that passed him on its way to its commercial prison but he strove to
pierce to the motive centre of its ugliness. It was always with a
feeling of displeasure that he entered the Green and saw on the far
side the gloomy building of the College.
  As he walked thus through the ways of the city he had his ears and
eyes ever prompt to receive impressions. It was not only in Skeat that
he found words for his treasure-house, he found them also at haphazard
in the shops, on advertisements, in the mouths of the plodding public.
He kept repeating them to himself till they lost all instantaneous
meaning for him and became wonderful vocables. He was determined to
fight with every energy of soul and body against any possible
consignment to what he now regarded as the hell of hells -- the
region, otherwise expressed, wherein everything is found to be obvious
-- and the saint who formerly was chary of speech in obedience to a
commandment of silence could just be recognised in the artist who
schooled himself to silence lest words should return him his
discourtesy. Phrases came to him asking to have themselves explained.
He said to himself: I must wait for the Eucharist to come to me: and
then he set about translating the phrase into common sense. He spent
days and nights hammering noisily as he built a house of silence for
himself wherein he might await his Eucharist, days and nights
gathering the first fruits and every peace-offering and heaping them
upon his altar whereon he prayed clamorously the burning token of
satisfaction might descend. In class, in the hushed library, in the
company of other students he would suddenly hear a command to begone,
to be alone, a voice agitating the very tympanum of his ear, a flame
leaping into divine cerebral life. He would obey the command and
wander up and down the streets alone, the fervour of his hope
sustained by ejaculations until he felt sure that it was useless to
wander any more: and then he would return home with a deliberate,
unflagging step piecing together meaningless words and phrases with
deliberate unflagging seriousness.



                                XVI


  Their Eminences of the Holy College are hardly more scrupulous
solitaries during the ballot for Christ's vicar than was Stephen at
this time. He wrote a great deal of verse and, in default of any
better contrivance, his verse allowed him to combine the offices of
penitent and confessor. He sought in his verses to fix the most
elusive of his moods and he put his lines together not word by word
but letter by letter. He read Blake and Rimbaud on the values of
letters and even permuted and combined the five vowels to construct
cries for primitive emotions. To none of his former fervours had he
given himself with such a whole heart as to this fervour; a the monk
now seemed to him no more than half the artist. He persuaded himself
that it is necessary for an artist to labour incessantly at his art if
he wishes to express completely even the simplest conception and he
believed that every moment of inspiration must be paid for in advance.
He was not convinced of the truth of the saying [<Poeta nascitur, non
fit>] "The poet is born, not made" but he was quite sure of the truth
of this at least: [<Poema fit, non nascitur>] "The poem is made not
born." The burgher notion of the poet Byron in undress pouring out
verses [like] just as a city fountain pours out water seemed to him
characteristic of most popular judgments on esthetic matters and he
combated the notion at its root a by saying solemnly to Maurice --
Isolation is the first principle of artistic economy.
  Stephen did not attach himself to art in any spirit of youthful
dillettantism but strove to pierce to the significant heart of
everything. a He doubled backwards into the past of humanity and
caught glimpses of emergent art as one might have a vision of the
pleisiosauros emerging from his ocean of slime. He seemed almost to
hear the simple cries of fear and joy and wonder which are antecedent
to all song, the savage rhythms of men pulling at the oar, to see the
rude scrawls and the portable gods of men whose legacy Leonardo and
Michelangelo inherit. And over all this chaos of history and legend,
of fact and supposition, he strove to draw out a line of order, to
reduce the abysses of the past to order by a diagram. The treatises
which were recommended to him he found valueless and trifling; the
Laocoon of Lessing irritated him. He wondered how the world could
accept as valuable contributions such [fantas] fanciful
generalisations. What finer certitude could be attained by the artist
if he believed that ancient art was plastic and that modern art was
pictorial -- ancient art in this context meaning art between the
Balkans and the Morea and modern art meaning art anywhere between the
Caucasus and the Atlantic except in the sacrosanct region. A great
contempt devoured him for the critics who considered "Greek" and
"classical" interchangeable terms and so full was he of intemperate
anger that [all week Saturday] when Father Butt gave 'Othello' as the
subject for the essay of the week Stephen lodged on the following
Monday a profuse, downright protest against the 'masterpiece.' The
young men in the class laughed and Stephen, as he looked
contemptuously at the laughing faces, thought of a self-submersive
reptile.
  No-one would listen to his theories: no-one was interested in art.
The young men in the college regarded art as a continental vice and
they said in effect, "If we must have art are there not enough
subjects in Holy Writ?" -- for an artist with them was a man who
painted pictures. It was a bad sign for a young man to show interest
in anything but his examinations or his prospective 'job.' It was all
very well to be able to talk about it but really art was all 'rot':
besides it was probably immoral; they knew (or, at least, they had
heard) about studios. They didn't want that kind of thing in their
country. Talk about beauty, talk about rhythms, talk about esthetic --
they knew what all the fine talk covered. One day a big countrified
student came over to Stephen and asked:
  --Tell us, aren't you an artist?
  Stephen gazed at the idea-proof young man, without answering.
  --Because if you are why don't you wear your hair long?
  A few bystanders laughed at this and Stephen wondered for which of
the learned professions the young man's father designed him.
  In spite of his surroundings Stephen continued his labours of
research and all the more ardently since he imagined they had been put
under ban. It was part of that ineradicable egoism which he was
afterwards to call redeemer that he conceived converging to him the
deeds and thoughts of his microcosm. Is the mind of youth medieval
that it is so divining of intrigue? Field-sports (or their equivalent
in the world of mentality) are perhaps the most effective cure and
Anglo-Saxon educators favour rather a system of hardy brutality. But
for this fantastic idealist, eluding the grunting booted apparition
with a bound, the mimic warfare was no less ludicrous than unequal in
a ground chosen to his disadvantage. Behind the rapidly indurating
shield the sensitive answered: Let the pack of enmities come tumbling
and sniffing to my highlands after their game. There was his ground
and he flung them disdain from flashing antlers.
  Indeed he felt the morning in his blood: he was aware of some
movement already proceeding a out in Europe. Of this last phrase he
was fond for it seemed to him to unroll the measurable world before
the feet of the islanders. Nothing could persuade him that the world
was such as Father Butt's students conceived it. He had no need for
the cautions which were named indispensable, no reverence for the
proprieties which were called the bases of life. He was an enigmatic
figure in the midst of his shivering society where he enjoyed a
reputation. His comrades hardly knew how far to venture with him and
professors pretended to think his seriousness a sufficient warrant
against any practical disobedience.-On his side chastity, having been
found a great inconvenience, had been quietly abandoned and the youth
amused himself in the company of certain of his fellow-students among
whom (as the fame went) wild living was not unknown. The Rector of
Belvedere had a brother who was at this time a student in the college
and one night in the gallery of the Gaiety (for Stephen had become a
constant 'god' ) another Belvedere boy, a who was also a student in
the college, bore scandalous witness into Stephen's ear.
  --I say, Daedalus .
  --Well?
  --I wonder what MacNally would say if he met his brother -- you know
the fellow in the college?
  --Yes .
  --I saw him in Stephen's Green the other day with a tart. I was just
thinking if MacNally saw him . . .
  The informant paused: and then, afraid of over-implication and with
an air of a connoisseur, he added seriously:
  --Of course she was . . . all right.
  Every evening after tea Stephen left his house and set out for the
city, Maurice at his side. The elder smoked cigarettes and the younger
ate lemon drops and, aided by these animal comforts, they beguiled the
long journey with philosophic discourse. Maurice was a very attentive
person and one evening he told Stephen that he was keeping a diary of
their conversations. Stephen asked to see the diary but Maurice said
it would be time enough for that at the end of the first year. Neither
of the youths had the least suspicion of themselves; they both looked
upon life with frank curious eyes (Maurice naturally serving himself
with Stephen's vision when his own was deficient) and they both felt
that it was possible to arrive at a sane understanding of so-called
mysteries if one only had patience enough. On their way in every
evening the heights of argument were traversed and the younger boy
aided the elder bravely in the building of an entire science of
esthetic. They spoke to each other very decisively and Stephen found
Maurice very useful for raising objections. When they came to the gate
of the Library they used to stand to finish some branch of their
subject and often the discussion was so protracted that Stephen would
decide that it was too late to go in to read and so they would set
their faces for Clontarf and return in the same manner. Stephen, after
certain hesitations, showed Maurice the first-fruits of his verse and
Maurice asked who the woman was. Stephen looked a little vaguely
before him before answering and in the end had to answer that he
didn't know who she was.
  To this unknown verses were now regularly inscribed and it seemed
that the evil dream of love which Stephen chose to commemorate in
these verses lay veritably upon the world now in a season of a damp
violet mist. He had abandoned his Madonna, he had forsaken his word
and he had withdrawn sternly from his little world and surely it was
not wonderful that his solitude should propel him to frenetic
outbursts of a young man's passion and to outbursts of loneliness?
This quality of the mind which so reveals itself is called (when
incorrigible) a decadence but if we are to take a general view of
[life] the world we cannot but see a process to life through
corruption. There were moments for him, however, when such a process
would have seemed intolerable, life on any common terms an intolerable
offence, and at such moments he prayed for nothing and lamented for
nothing but he felt with a sweet sinking of consciousness that if the
end came to him it was in the arms of the unknown that it would come
to him:

         The dawn awakes with tremulous alarms,
             How grey, how cold, how bare!
           O, hold me still white arms, encircling arms
             And hide me, heavy hair!

           Life is a dream, a dream. The hour is done
             And antiphon is said.
           We go from the light and falsehood of the sun
             To bleak wastes of the dead.

  Little by little Stephen became more irregular in his attendances at
the college. He would leave his house every morning at the usual hour
and come into the city on the tram. But always at Amiens St Station he
would get down and walk and as often as not he would decide to follow
some trivial indication of city life instead of entering the
oppressive life of the College. He often walked thus for seven or
eight hours at a stretch without feeling in the least fatigued. The
damp Dublin winter seemed to harmonise with his inward sense of
unreadiness and he did not follow the least of feminine provocations
through tortuous, unexpected ways any more zealously than he followed
through ways even less satisfying the nimble movements of the elusive
one. What was that One: arms of love that had not love's malignity,
laughter running upon the mountains of the morning, an hour wherein
might be encountered the incommunicable? And if the heart but trembled
an instant at some approach to that he would cry, youthfully,
passionately "It is so! It is so! Life is such as I conceive it." He
spurned from before him the stale maxims of the Jesuits and he swore
an oath that [never] they should never establish over him an
ascendancy. He spurned from before him a world of the higher culture
in which there was neither scholarship nor art nor dignity of manners
-- a world of trivial intrigues and trivial triumphs. Above all he
spurned from before him the company of [the] decrepit youth -- and he
swore an oath that never would they establish with him a compact of
fraud. Fine words! fine oaths! crying bravely and passionately even in
the teeth of circumstances. For not unfrequently in the pauses of
rapture Dublin would lay a sudden hand upon his shoulder, and the
chill of the summons would strike to his heart. One day he passed on
his homeward journey through Fairview. At the fork of the roads before
the swampy beach a big dog was recumbent. From time to time he lifted
his muzzle in the vapourous air, uttering a prolonged sorrowful howl.
People had gathered on the footpaths to hear him. [and] Stephen made
one of them till he felt the first drops of rain, and then he
continued his way in silence under the dull surveillance of heaven,
hearing from time to time behind him the strange lamentation.
  It was natural that the more the youth sought solitude for himself
the more his society sought to prevent his purpose. Though he was
still in his first year he was considered a personality and there were
even many who thought that though his theories were a trifle ardent
they were not without meaning. Stephen came seldom to lectures,
prepared nothing and absented himself from term examinations and not
merely was no remark passed on these extravagances but it was supposed
probable that he represented really the artistic type and that he was,
after the fashion of that little known tribe, educating himself. It
must not be supposed that the popular University of Ireland lacked an
intelligent centre. Outside the compact body of national revivalists
there were here and there students who had certain ideas of their own
and were more or less tolerated by their fellows. For instance there
was a serious young feminist named McCann -- a blunt brisk figure,
wearing a Cavalier beard and shooting-suit, and a steadfast reader of
the <Review of Reviews>. The students of the college did not
understand what manner of ideas he favoured and they considered that
they rewarded his originality sufficiently by calling him
'Knickerbockers.' There was also the College orator -- a most amenable
young man who spoke at all meetings. Cranly too was a personality and
Madden had soon been recognised as the a spokesman of the patriotic
party. Stephen may be said to have occupied the position of
notable-extraordinary: very few had ever heard of the writers he was
reported to read and those who had knew them to be mad fellows. At the
same time as Stephen's manner was so unbending to all it was supposed
that he had preserved his sanity entire and safely braved temptations.
People began to defer to him, to invite him to their houses and to
present serious faces to him. His were simply theories and, as he had
as yet committed no breach of the law, he was respectfully invited to
read a paper before the Literary and Historical Society of the
College. The date was fixed for the end of March and the title of the
paper was announced as 'Drama and Life.' Many risked the peril of
rebuff to engage the young eccentric in talk but Stephen preserved a
disdainful silence. One night as he was returning from a party a
reporter of one of the Dublin papers, who had been introduced that
evening to the prodigy, approached him and after a few exchanges said
to him tentatively:
  --I was reading of that writer . . . what's this you call him
. . . Maeterlinck the other day . . . you know?
  --Yes .
  --I was reading, <The Intruder> I think was the name of it . . .
Very . . . curious play . . .
  Stephen had no wish to talk to the man about Maeterlinck and on the
other hand he did not like to offend by the silence which the remark
and the tone and the intention all seemed to deserve so he cast about
quickly in his mind for some non-committal banality with which to pay
the debt. At last he said:
  --It would be hard to put it on the stage.
  The journalist was quite satisfied at this exchange as if it was
just this impression and no other which Maeterlinck's play had
produced upon him. He assented with conviction:
  --O yes! . . . next to impossible . . .
  Allusions of such a kind to what he held so dear at heart wounded
Stephen deeply. It must be said simply and at once that at this time
Stephen suffered the most enduring influence of his life. The
spectacle of the world which his intelligence presented to him with
every sordid and deceptive detail set side by side with the spectacle
of the world which the monster in him, now grown to a reasonably
heroic stage, presented also had often filled him with such sudden
despair as could be assuaged only by melancholy versing. He had all
but decided to consider the two worlds as aliens one to another --
however disguised or expressed the most utter of pessimisms -- when he
encountered through the medium of hardly procured translations the
spirit of Henrik Ibsen. He understood that spirit instantaneously.
Some years before this same instantaneous understanding had occurred
when he had read the very puzzled, apologetic account which Rousseau's
English biographer had given of the young philosopher's stealing his
mistress's spoons and allowing a servant-girl to be accused of the
theft at the very moment when he was beginning his struggle for Truth
and Liberty. Just as then with the [perverted] perverse philosopher so
now: Ibsen had no need of apologist or critic: the minds of the old
Norse poet and of the perturbed young Celt met in a moment of radiant
simultaneity. Stephen was captivated first by the evident excellence
of the art: he was not long before he began to affirm, out of a
sufficiently scanty knowledge of the tract, of course, that Ibsen was
the first among the dramatists of the world. In translations of the
Hindu or Greek or Chinese theatres he found only anticipations of or
attempts and in the French classical, and the English romantic,
theatres anticipations less distinct and attempts less successful. But
it was not only this excellence which captivated him: it was not that
which he greeted gladly with an entire joyful spiritual salutation. It
was the very spirit of Ibsen himself that was discerned moving behind
the impersonal manner of the artist: [Ibsen with his profound
self-approval, Ibsen with his haughty, disillusioned courage, Ibsen
with his minute and wilful energy.] a mind of sincere and boylike
bravery, of disillusioned pride, of minute and wilful energy. Let the
world solve itself in whatsoever fashion it pleased, let its putative
Maker justify Himself by whatsoever processes seemed good to Him, one
could scarcely advance the dignity of the human attitude a step beyond
this answer. Here and not in Shakespeare or Goethe was the successor
to the first poet of the Europeans, here, as only to such purpose in
Dante, a human personality had been found united with an artistic
manner which was itself almost a natural phenomenon: and the spirit of
the time united one more readily with the Norwegian than with the
Florentine.
  The young men of the college had not the least idea who Ibsen was
but from what they could gather here and there they surmised that he
must be one of the atheistic writers whom the papal secretary puts on
the <Index>. It was a novelty to hear anyone mention such a name in
their college but as the professors gave no lead in condemnation they
concluded that they had better wait. Meanwhile they were somewhat
impressed: many now began to say that though Ibsen was immoral he was
a great writer and one of the professors was heard to say that when he
was in Berlin last summer on his holidays there had been a great deal
of talk about some play of Ibsen's which was being performed at one of
the theatres. Stephen had begun to study Danish instead of preparing
his course for the examination and this fact was magnified into a
report that he was a profit by rumours which he took no trouble to
contradict. He smiled to think that these people in their hearts
feared him as an infidel and he marvelled at the quality of their
supposed beliefs. Father Butt talked to him a great deal and Stephen
was nothing loth to make himself the herald of a new order. He never
spoke with heat and he argued always as if he did not greatly care
which way the argument went, at the same time never losing a point.
The Jesuits and their flocks may have said to themselves: the a
youthful seeming-independent we know, and the appeasable patriot we
know, but what are you? They played up to him very well, considering
their disadvantages, and Stephen could not understand why they took
the trouble to humour him.
  --Yes, yes, said Father Butt one day after one of these scenes, I
see . . . I quite see your point . . . It would apply of course to the
dramas of Turgenieff?
  Stephen had read and admired certain translations of Turgenieff's
novels and stories and he asked therefore with a genuine note in his
voice:
  --Do you mean his novels?
  --Novels, yes, said Father Butt swiftly, . . . his novels, to be
sure . . . but of course they are dramas . . . are they not, Mr
Daedalus?
  Very often Stephen used to visit at a house in Donnybrook the
atmosphere of which was compact of liberal patriotism and orthodox
study. There were several marriageable daughters in the family and
whenever any promise [was] on the part of a young student was
signalled he was sure to receive an invitation to this house. The
young feminist McCann was a constant visitor there and Madden used to
visit occasionally. The father of the family was an elderly man who
played chess on week evenings with his grown-up sons and assisted on
Sunday evenings at a round of games and music. The music was supplied
by Stephen. There was an old piano in the room and when the room was
tired of games one of the daughters used to come over smilingly to
Stephen and a ask him to sing them some of his beautiful songs. The
keys of the piano were worn away and sometimes the notes would not
sound but the tone was soft and mellow and Stephen used to sit down
and sing his beautiful songs to the polite, tired, unmusical audience.
The songs, for him at least, were really beautiful -- the old country
songs of England and the elegant songs of the Elizabethans. The
'moral' of these songs was sometimes a little dubious and Stephen's
ear used to catch at once the note of qualification in the applause
that followed them. The studious daughters found these songs very
quaint but Mr Daniel said that Stephen should sing operatic music if
he wanted to have his voice heard properly. In spite of the entire
absence of sympathy between this circle and himself Stephen was very
much at ease in it and he was, as they bade him be, very much 'at
home' as he sat on the sofa counting the lumps of horsehair with the
ends of his a fingers, and listening to the conversation. The young
men and the daughters amused themselves tolerably under Mr Daniel's
eye but whenever there was an approach to artistic matters during the
process of their games Stephen with egoistic humour imagined his
presence acting as a propriety. He could see seriousness developing on
the shrewd features of a young man who had to put a certain question
to one of the daughters:
  --I suppose it's my turn now . . . Well . . . let me see . . . (and
here he became as serious as a young man, who has been laughing very
much for a full five minutes, can become)
. . . Who is your favourite poet, Annie?
  Annie thought for a few moments: there was a pause. Annie and the
young man were 'doing' the same course.
  --. . . German?
  --. .. Yes.
  Annie thought for another few moments while the table waited to be
edified.
  --I think . . . Goethe.
  McCann used very often to organise a charades in which he used to
take the most violent parts. The charades were very farcical and
everyone took his part with goodwill, Stephen as well as the others.
Stephen would [play often] play his quiet deliberative manner off
against McCann's uproarious acting and for this reason the two were
often 'picked' together. These charades wearied Stephen a little but
McCann was very much given to organising them as he was of the opinion
that amusement is necessary for the bodily welfare of mankind. The
young feminist's Northern accent always excited laughter and his face,
adorned with its Cavalier beard, was certainly capable of brazen
grimaces. In the college McCann [was] had never been assimilated on
account of his 'ideas' but here he partook of the inner life of the
family. In this house it was the custom to call a young visitor by his
Christian name a little too soon and though Stephen was spared the
compliment, McCann was never spoken of as anything but 'Phil.' Stephen
used to call him 'Bonny Dundee' nonsensically associating [the] his
brisk name and his brisk manners with the sound of the line:

          Come fill up my cup, come fill up my can.

  Whenever the evening assumed the character of a serious affair Mr
Daniel would be asked to recite something for the company. Mr Daniel
had formerly been the manager of a theatre in Wexford and he had often
spoken at public meetings through the country. He recited national
pieces in a stern declamatory fashion amid attentive silence. The
daughters also recited. During these recitations Stephen's eye never
moved from the picture of the Sacred Heart which hung right above the
head of the reciter's head. The Miss Daniels were not so imposing as
their father and their dress was {illegible word} somewhat colleen.
Jesus, moreover, exposed his heart somewhat too obviously in the cheap
print: and Stephen's thoughts were usually fascinated to a pleasant
stupor by these twin futilities. A parliamentary charade was frequent.
Mr Daniel had sat for his county some years before and for this reason
he was chosen to impersonate the Speaker of the House. McCann always
represented a member of the Opposition and he spoke point-blank. Then
a member would protest and there would be a make-believe of
parliamentary manners.
  --Mr Speaker, I must ask . . .
  --Order! Order!
  --You know it's a lie!
  --You must withdraw, Sir.
  --As I was saying before the honourable gentleman interrupted we
must . . .
  --I won't withdraw.
  --I must ask honourable members to preserve order in the House.
  --I won't withdraw.
  --Order! Order!
  Another favourite was "Who's Who." A person goes out of the room and
the rest of the company choose the name of someone who is supposed to
have special attractions for the absent player. This latter, when he
returns to the company, has to ask questions all round and try to
guess the name. This game was generally used to the discomfiture of
the young male guests for the manner in which it was played suggested
that each young student had an affair of the heart with some young
lady within tolerable distance of him: but the young men, who were at
first surprised by these implications, ended by looking as if they
thought that the sagacity of the other players had just forestalled
them in an unexpected, not unpleasant, discovery. No such suggestion
could be seriously made by the company to fit Stephen's case and so
the first time he played the game they chose differently for him. The
[company was] players were unable to answer his questions when he
returned to the room: such questions as: "Where does the person live?"
"Is the person married or single?" "What age is the person?" could not
be answered by the circle until McCann had been consulted in a swift
undertone. The answer "Norway" gave Stephen the clue at once and so
the game ended and the company proceeded to divert themselves as
before this serious interruption. Stephen sat down beside one of the
daughters and, while admiring the rural comeliness of her features,
waited quietly for her first word which, he knew, would destroy his
satisfaction. Her large handsome eyes looked at him for a while as if
they were a about to trust him and then she said:
  --How did you guess it so quickly?
  --I knew you meant him. But you're wrong about his age.
  Others had heard this: but she was impressed by a possible vastness
of the unknown, complimented to confer with one who conferred directly
with the exceptional. She leaned forward to speak with soft
seriousness.
  --Why, how old is he?
  --Over seventy.
  --Is he?
  Stephen now imagined that he had explored this region sufficiently
and he would have discontinued his visits had not two causes induced
him to continue. The first cause was the unpleasant character of his
home and the second was the curiosity occasioned by the advent of a
new figure. One evening while he was musing on the horsehair sofa he
heard his name called and stood up to be introduced. A dark a
full-figured girl was standing before him and, without waiting for
Miss Daniel's introduction, she said:
  --I think we know each other already.
  She sat beside him on the sofa and he found out that she was
studying in the same college with the Miss Daniels and that she always
signed her name in Irish. She said Stephen should a learn Irish too
and join the League. A young man of the company, [with] whose face
wore always the same look of studied purpose, spoke with her across
Stephen addressing her familiarly by her Irish name. Stephen therefore
spoke very formally and always addressed her as 'Miss Clery.' She
seemed on her part to include him in the a general scheme of her
nationalising charm: and when he helped her into her jacket she
allowed his hands to rest for a moment against the warm flesh of her
shoulders.


                               XVII


  Stephen's home-life had by this time grown sufficiently unpleasant:
the direction of his development was against the
stream of tendency of his family. The evening walks with Maurice had
been prohibited for it had become evident that Stephen was corrupting
his brother to idle habits. Stephen was harassed very much by
enquiries as to his progress at the College and Mr Daedalus,
meditating upon the evasive answers, had begun to express a fear that
his son was falling into bad company. The youth was given to
understand that if he did not succeed brilliantly at the coming
examination his career at the University would come to a close. He was
not greatly troubled by this warning for he knew that his fate was, in
this respect, with his godfather and not with his father. He felt that
the moments of his youth were too precious to be wasted in a dull
mechanical endeavour and he determined, whatever came of it, to
prosecute his intentions to the end. His family expected that he would
at once follow the path of remunerative respectability and save the
situation but he could not satisfy his family. He thanked their
intention: it had first fulfilled him with egoism; and he rejoiced
that his life had been so self-centred. He felt [also] however that
there were activities which it a would be a peril :D to postpone.
  Maurice accepted this prohibition with a bad grace and had to be
restrained by his brother from overt disobedience. Stephen himself
bore it lightly because he could ease himself greatly in solitude and
for human channels, at the worst, he could resort to a few of his
college-companions. He was now busily preparing his paper for the
Literary and Historical Society and he took every precaution to ensure
in it a maximum of explosive force. It seemed to him that the students
might need only the word to enkindle them towards liberty or that, at
least, his trumpet-call might bring to his side a certain minority of
the elect. McCann was the Auditor of the Society and as he was anxious
to know the trend of Stephen's paper the two used often to leave the
Library at ten o'clock and walk towards the Auditor's lodgings,
discussing. McCann enjoyed the reputation of a fearless, free-spoken
young man but Stephen found it difficult to bring him to any fixed
terms on matters which were held to be dangerous ground. McCann would
talk freely on feminism and on rational life: he believed that the
sexes should be educated together in order to accustom them early to
each other's influences and he believed that women should be afforded
the same opportunities as were afforded to the so-called superior sex
and he believed that women had the right to compete with men in every
branch of social and intellectual activity. He also held the opinion
that a man should live without using any kind of stimulant, that he
had a moral obligation to transmit to posterity sound minds in sound
bodies, and that he should not allow himself to be dictated to on the
subject of dress by any conventions. Stephen delighted to riddle these
theories with agile bullets.
  --You would have no sphere of life closed to them?
  --Certainly not.
  --Would you have the soldiery, the police and the fire-brigade
recruited also from them?
  --There are certain social duties for which women are physically
unfitted.
  --I believe you.
  --At the same time they should be allowed to follow any civil
profession for which they have an aptitude.
  --Doctors and lawyers?
  --Certainly.
  --And what about the third learned profession?
  --How do you mean?
  --Do you think they would make good confessors?
  --You are flippant. The Church does not allow women to enter the
priesthood.
  --O, the Church!
  Whenever the conversation reached this point McCann refused to
follow it further. The discussions usually ended in [an impasse] a
deadlock:
  --But you go mountain-climbing in search of fresh air?
  --Yes.
  --And bathing in the summertime?
  --Yes.
  --And surely the mountain air and the salt water act as stimulants!
  --Natural stimulants, yes.
  --What do you call an unnatural stimulant?
  --Intoxicating drinks.
  --But they are produced from natural vegetable substances, aren't
they?
  --Perhaps, but by an unnatural process.
  --Then you regard a brewer as a high thaumaturgist?
  --Intoxicating drinks are manufactured to satisfy artificially
induced appetites. Man, in the normal condition, has no need for such
props to life.
  --Give me an example of man in what you call 'the normal condition.'
  --A man who lives a healthy, natural life.
  --Yourself?
  --Yes.
  --Do you then represent normal humanity?
  --I do.
  --Then is normal humanity short-sighted and tone-deaf?
  --Tone-deaf?
  --Yes: I think you are tone-deaf.
  --I like to hear music.
  --What music?
  --All music.
  --But you cannot distinguish one air from another.
  --No: I can recognise some airs.
  --For instance?
  --I can recognise 'God save the Queen.'
  --Perhaps because all the people stand up and take off their hats.
  --Well, admit that my ear is a little defective.
  --And your eyes?
  --They too.
  --Then how do you represent normal humanity?
  --In my manner of life.
  --Your wants and the manner in which you satisfy them,
  --Exactly.
  --And what are your wants?
  --Air and food.
  --Have you any subsidiary ones?
  --The acquisition of knowledge.
  --And you need also religious comforts?
  --Maybe so . . . at times.
  --And women . . . at times?
  --Never!
  This last word was uttered with a moral snap of the jaws and in such
a business-like tone of voice that Stephen burst out into a fit of
loud laughter. As for the fact, though he was very suspicious in this
matter, Stephen was inclined to believe in McCann's chastity and much
as he disliked it he chose to contemplate it rather than the contrary
phenomenon. He almost trembled to think of that unhorizoned doggedness
working its way backwards.
  McCann's insistence on a righteous life and his condemnation of
licence as a sin against the future both annoyed and stung Stephen. It
annoyed him because it savoured so strongly of <paterfamilias> and it
stung him because it seemed to judge him incapable of that part. In
McCann's mouth he considered it unjust and unnatural and he fell back
on a sentence of Bacon's. The care of posterity, he quoted, is
greatest in them that have no posterity: and for the rest he said that
he could not understand what right the future had to hinder him from
any passionate exertions in the present.
  --That is not the teaching of Ibsen, said McCann.
  --Teaching! cried Stephen.
  --The moral of <Ghosts> is just the opposite of what you say.
  --Bah! You regard a play as a scientific document.
  --<Ghosts> teaches self-repression.
  --O Jesus! said Stephen in agony.
  --This is my lodging, said McCann, halting at the gate. I must go
in.
  --You have connected Ibsen and Eno's fruit salt forever in my mind,
said Stephen.
  --Daedalus, said the Auditor crisply, you are a good fellow but you
have yet to learn the dignity of altruism and the responsibility of
the human individual.
  Stephen had decided to address himself to Madden to [find out]
ascertain where Miss Clery was to be found. He set about this task
carefully. Madden and he were often together but their conversations
were rarely serious and though the rustic mind of one was very
forcibly impressed by the metropolitanism of the other both young men
were on relations of affectionate familiarity. Madden who had
previously tried in vain to infect Stephen with nationalistic fever
was surprised to hear these overtures of his friend. He was delighted
at the prospect of making such a convert and he began to appeal
eloquently to the sense of justice. Stephen allowed his critical
faculty a rest. The so-desired community for the realising of which
Madden sought to engage his personal force seemed to him anything but
ideal and the liberation which would have satisfied Madden would by no
means have satisfied him. The Roman, not the Sassenach, was for him
the tyrant of the islanders: and so deeply had the tyranny eaten into
all souls that the intelligence, first overborne so arrogantly, was
now eager to prove that arrogance its friend. The watchcry was Faith
and Fatherland, a sacred word in that world of cleverly inflammable
enthusiasms With literal obedience and with annual doles the Irish bid
eagerly for the honour which was studiously withheld from them to be
given to nations which in the [present] past, as in the [past]
present, had never bent the knee but in defiance. While the multitude
of preachers assured them that high honours were on the way and
encouraged them ever to hope. The last should be first, according to
the Christian sentiment, and whosoever humbled himself, exalted and in
reward for several centuries of obscure fidelity the Pope's Holiness
had presented a tardy cardinal to an island which was for him,
perhaps, only the afterthought of Europe.
  Madden was prepared to admit the truth of much of this but he gave
Stephen to understand that the new movement was politic. If the least
infidelity were hoisted on the standard the people would not flock to
it and for this reason the promoters desired as far as possible to
work hand in hand with the priests. Stephen objected that this working
hand in hand with the priests had over and over again ruined the
chances of revolutions. Madden agreed: but now at least the priests
were on the side of the people.
  --Do you not see, said Stephen, that they encourage the study of
Irish that their flocks may be more safely protected from the wolves
of disbelief; they consider it is an opportunity to withdraw the
people into a past of literal, implicit faith?
  --But really our peasant has nothing to gain from English
Literature.
  --Rubbish!
  --Modern at least. You yourself are always railing . . .
  --English is the medium for the Continent.
  --We want an Irish Ireland.
  --It seems to me you do not care what banality a man expresses so
long as he expresses it in Irish.
  --I do not entirely agree with your modern notions. We want to have
nothing of this English civilisation.
  --But the civilisation of which you speak is not English -- it is
Aryan. The modern notions are not English; they point the way of Aryan
civilisation.
  --You want our peasants to ape the gross materialism of the
Yorkshire peasant?
  --One would imagine the country was inhabited by cherubim. Damme if
I see much difference in peasants: they all seem to me as like one
another as a peascod is like another peascod. The Yorkshireman is
perhaps better fed.
  --Of course you despise the peasant because you live in the city.
  --I don't despise his office in the least.
  --But you despise him -- he's not clever enough for you.
  --Now, you know, Madden that's nonsense. To begin with he's as cute
as a fox -- try to pass a false coin on him and you'll see. But his
cleverness is all of a low order. I really don't think that the Irish
peasant represents a very admirable type of culture.
  --That's you all out! Of course you sneer at him because he's not
up-to-date and lives a simple life.
  --Yes, a life of dull routine -- the calculation of coppers, the
weekly debauch and the weekly piety -- a life lived in cunning and
fear between the shadows of the parish chapel and the asylum!
  --The life of a great city like London seems to you better?
  --The [English] intelligence of an English city is not perhaps at a
very high level but at least it is higher than the mental swamp of the
Irish peasant.
  --And what about the two as moral beings?
  --Well?
  --The Irish are noted for at least one virtue all the world over.
  --Oho! I know what's coming now!
  --But it's a fact -- they are chaste.
  --To be sure.
  --You like to run down your own people at every hand's turn but you
can't accuse them . . .
  --Very good: you are partly right. I fully recognise that my
countrymen have not yet advanced [to] as far as the machinery of
Parisian harlotry because . . .
  --Because . . . ?
  --Well, because they can do it by hand, that's why!
  --Good God, you don't mean to say you think . . .
  --My good youth, I know what I am saying is true and so do you know
it. Ask Father Pat and ask Dr Thisbody and ask Dr Thatbody. I was at
school and you were at school -- and that's enough about it.
  --O, Daedalus!
  This accusation laid a silence on the conversation. Then Madden
spoke:
  --Well, if these are your ideas I don't see what you want coming to
me and talking about learning Irish.
  --I would like to learn it -- as a language, said Stephen lyingly.
At least I would like to see first.
  --So you admit you are an Irishman after all and not one of the red
garrison.
  --Of course I do.
  --And don't you think that every Irishman worthy of the name should
be able to speak his native tongue?
  --I really don't know.
  --And don't you think that we as a race have a right to be free?
  --O, don't ask me such questions, Madden. You can use these phrases
of the platform but I can't.
  --But surely you have some political opinions, man!
  --I am going to think them out. I am an artist, don't you see? Do
you believe that I am?
  --O, yes, I know you are.
  --Very well then, how the devil can you expect me to settle
everything all at once? Give me time.
  So it was decided that Stephen was to begin a course of lessons in
Irish. He bought the O'Growney's primers published by the Gaelic
League but refused either to pay a subscription to the League or to
wear the badge in his buttonhole. He had found out what he had
desired, namely, the class in which Miss Clery was. People at home did
not seem opposed to this new freak of his. Mr Casey taught him a few
Southern songs in Irish and always raised his glass to Stephen saying
"Sinn Fein" instead of "Good Health." Mrs Daedalus was probably
pleased for she thought that the superintendence of priests and the
society of harmless enthusiasts might succeed in influencing her son
in the right direction: she had begun to fear for him. Maurice said
nothing and asked no questions. He did not understand what made his
brother associate with the patriots and he did not believe that the
study of Irish seemed in any way useful to Stephen: but he was silent
and waited. Mr Daedalus said that he did not mind his son's learning
the language so long as it did not keep him from his legitimate work.
  One evening when Maurice came back from school he brought with him
the news that the retreat would begin in three days' time. This news
suddenly delivered showed Stephen his position. He could hardly
believe that in a year his point of view had changed so completely.
Only twelve months ago he had been clamouring for forgiveness and
promising endless penances. He could hardly believe that it was no
other than he who had clung so fiercely to the sole means of salvation
which the Church vouchsafes to her guilty children. He marvelled at
the terror which had then possessed him. One evening during the
retreat he asked his brother what kind of sermons the priest was
giving. The two were standing together looking into the window of a
stationer's shop and it was a picture of S. Anthony in the window
which had led to the question. Maurice smiled broadly as he answered:
  --Hell today.
  --And what kind of a sermon was it?
  --Usual kind of thing. Stink in the morning and pain of loss in the
evening.
  Stephen laughed and looked at the square-shouldered boy beside him.
Maurice announced facts in a dry satirical voice and his cloudy
complexion did not change colour when he laughed. He made Stephen
think of the pictures in 'Silas Verney.' His sombre gravity, his
careful cleansing of his much-worn clothes, and the premature
disillusionment of his manner all suggested the human vesture of some
spiritual or philosophic problem transplanted from Holland. Stephen
did not know in what stage the problem was and he thought it wiser to
allow it its own path of solution.
  --Do you know what the priest told us also? asked Maurice after a
pause.
  --What?
  --He said we weren't to have companions.
  --Companions?
  --That we weren't to go for walks in the evenings with any special
companions. If we wanted to take a walk, he said, a lot of us were to
go together.
  Stephen halted in the street and struck the palms of his hands
together.
  --What's up with you? said Maurice.
  --I know what's up with them, said Stephen. They're afraid.
  --Of course they're afraid, said Maurice gravely.
  --By the bye of course you have made the retreat?
  --O, yes. I'm going to the altar in the morning.
  --Are you really?
  --Tell the truth, Stephen. When mother gives you the money on Sunday
to go in to short twelve in Marlboro' St do you really go to Mass?
  Stephen coloured slightly.
  --Why do you ask that?
  --Tell the truth.
  --No . . . I don't.
  --And where do you go?
  --O anywhere . . . about the town.
  --So I thought.
  --You're a 'cute fellow, said Stephen in a sidewise fashion. Might I
ask do you go to mass yourself?
  --O, yes, said Maurice.
  They walked on [then] for a short time in silence. Then Maurice
said:
  --I have bad hearing.
  Stephen made no remark.
  --And I think I must be a little stupid.
  --How's that?
  In his heart Stephen felt that he was condemning his brother. In
this instance he could not admit that freedom from strict religious
influences was desirable. It seemed to him that anyone who could
contemplate the condition of his soul in such a prosaic manner was not
worthy of freedom and was fit only for the severest shackles of the
Church.
  --Well today the priest was telling us a true story. It was about
the death of the drunkard. The priest came in to see him and talked to
him and asked him to say he was sorry and to promise to give up drink.
The man felt that he was going to die in a few moments but he sat
upright in the bed, the priest said, and pulled out a black bottle
from under the bedclothes
  --Well?
  --And said "Father, if this was to be the last I was ever to drink
in this world I must drink it."
  --Well?
  --So he drained the bottle dry. That very moment he dropped dead,
said the priest lowering his voice. "That man fell dead in the bed,
stone dead. He died and went . . . " He spoke so low that I couldn't
hear but I wanted to know where the man went so I leaned forward to
hear and hit my nose a wallop against the bench in front. While I was
rubbing it the fellows knelt down to say the prayer so I didn't hear
where he went. Amn't I stupid?
  Stephen exploded ill laughter. He laughed so loudly that the people
who were passing turned to look at him and had to smile themselves by
attraction. He put his hands to his sides and the tears almost fell
out of his eyes. Every glimpse he caught of Maurice's solemn
olive-coloured face set him off on a new burst. He could say nothing
between times but -- "I'd have given anything to have seen it --
'Father, if this was the last' . . . and you with your mouth open. I'd
have given anything to have seen it."
  The Irish class was held every Wednesday night in a back room on the
second floor of a house in O'Connell St. The class consisted of six
young men and three young women. The teacher was a young man in
spectacles with a very sick-looking face and a very crooked mouth. He
spoke in a high-pitched voice and with a cutting Northern accent. He
never lost an opportunity of sneering at seoninism and at those who
would not learn their native tongue. He said that Beurla was the
language of commerce and Irish the speech of the soul and he had two
witticisms which always made his class laugh. One was the 'Almighty
Dollar' and the other was the 'Spiritual Saxon.' Everyone regarded Mr
Hughes as a great enthusiast and some thought he had a great career
before him as an orator. On Friday nights when there was a public
meeting of the League he often spoke but as he did not know enough
Irish he always excused himself at the beginning of his speech for
having to speak to the audience in the language of the [gallant]
'Spiritual Saxon.' At the end of every speech he quoted a piece of
verse. He scoffed very much at Trinity College and at the Irish
Parliamentary Party. He could not regard as patriots men who had taken
oaths of allegiance to the Queen of England and he could not regard as
a national university an institution which did not express the
religious convictions of the majority of the Irish people. His
speeches were always loudly applauded and Stephen heard some of the
audience say that they were sure he would be a great success at the
bar. On enquiry, Stephen found that Hughes, who was the son of a
Nationalist solicitor in Armagh, was a law-student at the King's Inns.
  The Irish class which Stephen attended was held in a very sparely
furnished room lit [with] by a gasjet which had a broken globe. Over
the mantelpiece hung the picture of a priest with a beard who, Stephen
found, was Father O'Growney. It was a beginners' class and its
progress was retarded by the stupidity of two of the young men. The
others in the class learned quickly and worked very hard. Stephen
found it very [hard] troublesome to pronounce the gutturals but he did
the best he could. The class was very serious and patriotic. The only
time Stephen found it inclined to levity was at the lesson which
introduced the word 'gradh.' The three young women laughed and the two
stupid young men laughed, finding something very funny in the Irish
word for 'love' or perhaps in the notion itself. But Mr Hughes and the
other three young men and Stephen were all very grave. When the
excitement of the word had passed Stephen's attention was attracted to
the younger of the stupid young men who was still blushing violently.
His blush continued for such a long time that Stephen began to feel
nervous. The young man grew more and more confused and what was worst
was that he was making all this confusion for himself for no-one in
the class but Stephen seemed to have noticed him. He continued so till
the end of the hour never once daring to raise his eyes from his book
and when he had occasion to use his handkerchief he did so stealthily
with his left hand.
  The meetings on Friday nights were public and were largely
patronised by priests. The organisers brought in reports from
different districts and the priests made speeches of exhortation. Two
young men would then be called on for songs in Irish and when it was
time for the whole company to break up all would rise and sing the
Rallying-Song. The young women would then begin to chatter while their
cavaliers helped them into their jackets. A very stout black-bearded
citizen who always wore a wideawake hat and a long bright green
muffler was a constant figure at these meetings. When the company was
going home he was usually to be seen surrounded by a circle of young
men who looked very meagre about his bulk. He had the voice of an ox
and he could be heard at a great distance, criticising, denouncing and
scoffing. His circle was the separatist centre and in it reigned the
irreconcilable temper. It had its headquarters in Cooney's
tobacco-shop where the members sat every evening in the 'Divan'
talking Irish loudly and smoking churchwardens. To this circle Madden
who was the captain of a club of hurley-players reported the muscular
condition of the young irreconcilables under his charge and the editor
of the weekly journal of the irreconcilable party reported any signs
of Philocelticism which he had observed in the Paris newspapers.
  By all this society liberty was held to be the chief desirable; the
members of it were fierce democrats. The liberty they desired for
themselves was mainly a liberty of costume and vocabulary: and Stephen
could hardly understand how such a poor scarecrow of liberty could
bring [to their] serious human beings to their knees in worship. As in
the Daniels' household he had seen people playing at being important
so here he saw people playing at being free. He saw that many
political absurdities arose from the lack of a just sense of
comparison in public men. The orators of this patriotic party were not
ashamed to cite the precedents of Switzerland and France. The
intelligent centres of the movement were so scantily supplied that the
analogies they gave out as exact and potent were really analogies
built haphazard upon very inexact knowledge. The cry of a solitary
Frenchman (A bas l'Angleterre! ) at a Celtic re-union in Paris would
be made by these enthusiasts the subject of a leading article in which
would be shown the imminence of aid for Ireland from the French
Government. A glowing example was to be found for Ireland in the case
of Hungary, an example, as these patriots imagined, of a
long-suffering minority, entitled by every right of race and justice
to a separate freedom, finally emancipating itself. In emulation of
that achievement bodies of young Gaels conflicted murderously in the
Phoenix Park with whacking hurley-sticks, thrice armed in their just
quarrel since their revolution had been blessed for them by the
Anointed, and the same bodies were set aflame with indignation [at] by
the unwelcome presence of any young sceptic who was aware of the
capable aggressions of the Magyars upon the Latin and Slav and
Teutonic populations, greater than themselves in number, which are
politically allied to them, and of the potency of a single regiment of
infantry to hold in check a town of twenty thousand inhabitants.
  Stephen said one day to Madden:
  --I suppose these hurley-matches and walking tours are preparations
for the great event.
  --There is more going on in Ireland at present than you are aware
of.
  --But what use are camans?
  --Well, you see, we want to raise the physique of the country.
  Stephen meditated for a moment and then he said:
  --It seems to me that the English Government is very good to you in
this matter.
  --How is that may I ask?
  --The English Government will take you every summer in batches to
different militia camps, train you to the use of modern weapons, drill
you, feed you and pay you and then send you home again when the
manoeuvres are over.
  --Well?
  --Wouldn't that be better for your young men than hurley-practice in
the Park?
  --Do you mean to say you want young Gaelic Leaguers to wear the
redcoat and take an oath of allegiance to the Queen and take her
shilling too?
  --Look at your friend, Hughes.
  --What about him?
  --One of these days he will be a barrister, a Q.C., perhaps a judge
-- and yet he sneers at the Parliamentary Party because they take an
oath of allegiance.
  --Law is law all the world over -- there must be someone to
administer it, particularly here, where the people have no friends in
Court.
  --Bullets are bullets, too. I do not quite follow the distinction
you make between administering English law and administering English
bullets: there is the same oath of allegiance for both professions.
  --Anyhow it is better for a man to follow a line of life which
civilisation regards as humane. Better be a barrister than a redcoat.
  --You consider the profession of arms a disreputable one. Why then
have you Sarsfield Clubs, Hugh O'Neill Clubs, Red Hugh Clubs?
  --O, fighting for freedom is different. But it is quite another
matter to take service meanly under your tyrant, to make yourself his
slave.
  --And, tell me, how many of your Gaelic Leaguers are studying for
the Second Division and looking for advancement in the Civil Service?
  --That's different. They are only civil servants: they're
not . . .
  --Civil be danmed! They are pledged to the Government, and paid by
the Government.
  --O, well, of course if you like to look at it that way . . .
  --And how many relatives of Gaelic Leaguers are in the police and
the constabulary? Even I know nearly ten of your friends [that] who
are sons of Police inspectors.
  --It is unfair to accuse a man because his father was so-and-so. A
son and a father often have different ideas.
  --But Irishmen are fond of boasting that they are true to the
traditions they receive in youth. How faithful all you fellows are to
Mother Church! Why would you not be as faithful to the tradition of
the helmet as to that of the tonsure?
  --We remain true to the Church because it is our national Church,
the Church our people have suffered for and would suffer for again.
The police are different. We look upon them as aliens, traitors,
oppressors of the people.
  --The old peasant down the country doesn't seem to be of your
opinion when he counts over his greasy notes and says "I'll put the
priest on Tom an' I'll put the polisman on Mickey."
  --I suppose you heard that sentence in some 'stage-Irishman' play.
It's a libel on our countrymen.
  --No, no, it is Irish peasant wisdom: he balances the priest against
the polisman and a very nice balance it is for they are both of a good
girth. A compensative system!
  --No West-Briton could speak worse of his countrymen. You are simply
giving vent to old stale libels -- the drunken Irishman, the
baboon-faced Irishman that we see in Punch.
  --What I say I see about me. The publicans and the pawn-brokers who
live on the miseries of the people spend part of the money they make
in sending their sons and daughters into religion to pray for them.
One of your professors in the Medical School who teaches you Sanitary
Science or Forensic Medicine or something -- God knows what -- is at
the same time the landlord of a whole streetful of brothels not a mile
away from where we are standing.
  --Who told you that?
  --A little robin-redbreast.
  --It's a lie!
  --Yes, it's a contradiction in terms, what I call a systematic
compensation.
  Stephen's conversations with the patriots were not all of this
severe type. Every Friday evening he met Miss Clery, or, as he had now
returned to the Christian name, Emma. She lived near Portobello and
any evening that the meeting was over early she walked home. She often
delayed a long time chatting with a low-sized young priest, a Father
Moran, who had a neat head of curly black hair and expressive black
eyes. This young priest was a pianist and sang sentimental songs and
was for many reasons a great favourite with the ladies. Stephen often
watched Emma and Father Moran. Father Moran, who sang tenor, had once
complimented Stephen saying he had heard many people speak highly of
his voice and hoping he would have the pleasure of hearing him some
time. Stephen had said the same thing to the priest adding that Miss
Clery had told him great things of <his> voice. At this the priest had
smiled and looked archly at Stephen. "One must not believe all the
complimentary things the ladies say of us" he had said. "The ladies
are a little given to -- what shall I say -- fibbing, I am afraid."
And here the priest had bit his lower rosy lip with two little white
even teeth and smiled with his expressive eyes and altogether looked
such a pleasant tender-hearted vulgarian that Stephen felt inclined to
slap him on the back admiringly. Stephen had continued talking for a
few minutes and once when the conversation had touched on Irish
matters the priest had become very serious and had said very piously
"Ah, yes. a God bless the work!" Father Moran was no lover of the old
droning chants, he told Stephen. Of course, he said, it is very grand
music severe style of music [<sic>]. But he held the opinion that the
Church must not be made too gloomy and he said with a charming smile
that the spirit of the Church was not gloomy. He said that one could
not expect the people to take kindly to severe music and that the
people needed more human religious music than the Gregorian and ended
by advising Stephen to learn "The Holy City" by Adams.
  --There is a song now, beautiful, full of lovely melody and yet --
religious. It has the religious sentiment, a touching a melody, power
-- soul, in fact.
  Stephen watching this young priest and Emma together usually worked
himself into a state of unsettled rage. It was not so much that he
suffered personally as that the spectacle seemed to him typical of
Irish ineffectualness. Often he felt his fingers itch. Father Moran's
eyes were so clear and tender-looking, Emma stood to his gaze in such
a poise of bold careless pride of the flesh that Stephen longed to
precipitate the two into each other's arms and shock the room even
though he knew the pain this impersonal generosity would cause
himself. Emma allowed him to see her home several times but she did
not seem to have reserved herself for him. The youth was piqued at
this for above all things he hated to be compared with others and, had
it not been that her body seemed so compact of pleasure, he would have
preferred to have been ignominiously left behind Her loud forced
manners shocked him at first until his mind had thoroughly mastered
the stupidity of hers. She criticised the Miss Daniels very sharply,
assuming, much to Stephen's discomfort, an identical temper in him.
She coquetted with knowledge, asking Stephen could he not persuade the
President of his College to admit women to the college. Stephen told
her to apply to McCann who was the champion of women. She laughed at
this and said with genuine dismay "Well, honestly, isn't he a
dreadful-looking artist?" She treated femininely everything that young
men are supposed to regard as serious but she made polite exception
for Stephen himself and for the Gaelic Revival. She asked him wasn't
he reading a paper and what was it on. She would give anything to go
and hear him: she was awfully fond of the theatre herself and a gypsy
woman had once read her hand and told her she would be an actress. She
had been three times to the pantomime and asked Stephen what he liked
best in pantomime. Stephen said he liked a good clown but she said
that she preferred ballets. Then she wanted to know did he go out much
to dances and pressed him to join an Irish dancing-class of which she
was a member. Her eyes had begun to imitate the expression of Father
Moran's -- an expression of tender significance when the conversation
was at the lowest level of banality. Often as he walked beside her
Stephen wondered how she had employed her time since he had last seen
her and he congratulated himself that he had caught an impression of
her when she was at her finest moment. In his heart he deplored the
change in her for he would have liked nothing so well as an adventure
with her now but he felt that even that warm ample body could hardly
compensate him for her distressing pertness and middle-class
affectations. In the centre of her attitude towards him he thought he
discerned a point of defiant illwill and he thought he understood the
cause of it. He had swept the moment into his memory, the figure and
the landscape into his treasure-room, and conjuring with all three had
brought forth some pages of sorry verse. One rainy night when the
streets were too bad for walking she took the Rathmines tram at the
Pillar and as she held down her hand to him from the step, thanking
him for his kindness and wishing him good-night, that episode of their
childhood seemed to magnetise the minds of both at the same instant.
The change of circumstances had reversed their positions, giving her
the upper hand. He took her hand caressingly, caressing one after
another the three lines on the a back of her kid glove and numbering
her knuckles, caressing also his own past towards which this
inconsistent hater of [antiquity] inheritances was always lenient.
They smiled at each other; and again in the centre of her amiableness
he discerned a [centre] point of illwill and he suspected that by her
code of honour she was obliged to insist on the forbearance of the
male and to despise him for forbearing.


                              XVIII




  Stephen's paper was fixed for the second Saturday in March. Between
Christmas and that date he had therefore an ample space of time
wherein to perform preparative abstinences. His forty days were
consumed in aimless solitary walks during which he forged out his
sentences. In this manner he had his whole essay in his mind a from
the first word to the last before he had put any morsel of it on
paper. In thinking or constructing the form of the essay he found
himself much a hampered by the sitting posture. His body disturbed him
and he adopted the expedient of appeasing it by gentle promenading.
Sometimes during his walks he lost the train of his thought and
whenever the void of his mind seemed irreclaimable he forced order
upon it by ejaculatory fervours. His morning walks were critical, his
evening walks imaginative and whatever had seemed plausible in the
evening was always rigorously examined in the light of day. These
wanderings in the desert  were reported from different points and Mr
Daedalus once asked his son what the hell had brought him out to a
Dolphin's Barn. Stephen said he had [been] gone part of the way home
with a fellow from the college whereupon Mr Daedalus remarked that the
fellow from the college [must] should have gone all the way into the
county Meath to live as his hand was in. Any acquaintances that were
encountered during these walks were never allowed to intrude on the
young man's meditations by commonplace conversation -- a fact which
they seemed to recognise in advance by a deferent salute. Stephen was
therefore very much surprised one evening as he was walking past the
Christian Brothers' School in North Richmond St to feel his arm seized
from behind and to hear a voice say somewhat blatantly:
  --Hello, Daedalus, old man, is that you?
  Stephen turned round and saw a tall young man with many eruptions on
his face dressed completely in heavy black. He stared for a few
moments, trying to recall the face.
  --Don't you remember me? I knew you at once.
  --O, yes now I do, said Stephen. But you've changed.
  --Think so?
  --I wouldn't know you . . . Are you . . . in mourning?
  Wells laughed.
  --By Jove, that's a good one. Evidently a you don't know your Church
when you see it.
  --What? You don't mean to say . . . ?
  --Fact, old man. I'm in Clonliffe at present. Been down in
Balbriggan today on leave: the boss is very bad. Poor old chap!
  --O, indeed!
  --You're over in the Green now, Boland told me. Do you know him? He
said you were at Belvedere with him.
  --Is he in too? Yes I know him.
  --He has a great opinion of you. He says you're a litterateur now.
  Stephen smiled and did not know what subject to suggest next. He
wondered how far this loud-voiced student intended to accompany him.
  --See me down a bit of the way, will you? I've just come off the
train at Amiens St. I'm making for dinner.
  --Certainly.
  So they walked on side by side.
  --Well, and what have you been doing with yourself? Having a good
time, I suppose? Down in Bray?
  --Ah, the usual thing, said Stephen.
  --I know: I know. After the esplanade girls, isn't that it? Silly
game, old man, silly game! Get tired of it.
  --You have, evidently.
  --Should think so: time too . . . Ever see any of the Clongowes
fellows?
  --Never one.
  --That's the way. We all lose sight of each other after we leave.
You remember Roth?
  --Yes.
  --Out in Australia now -- bushranger or something. You're going in
for literature, I suppose.
  --I don't know really what I'm going in for.
  --I know: I know. On the loose, isn't that it? a I've been there
myself.
  --Well, not exactly . . . began Stephen.
  --O, of course not! said Wells quickly with a loud laugh.
  Passing down Jones's Road they saw a gaudy advertisement in strong
colours for a melodramatic play. Wells asked Stephen had he read
<Trilby>.
  --Haven't you? Famous book, you know; style would suit you, I think.
Of course it's a bit . . . blue.
  --How is that?
  --O, well, you know . . . Paris, you know . . . artists.
  --O, is that the kind of book it is?
  --Nothing very wrong in it that I could see. Still some people think
it's a bit immoral.
  --You haven't it in the library in Clonliffe?
  --No, not likely . . . Don't I wish I was out of the show!
  --Are you thinking of leaving?
  --Next year -- perhaps this year -- I go to Paris for my theology.
  --You won't be sorry, I suppose.
  --You bet. Rotten show, this place. Food is not so bad but so dull,
you know.
  --Are there many students in it now?
  --O, yes . . . I don't mix much with them, you know . . . There are
a good lot.
  --I suppose you'll be a parish priest one of these days.
  --I hope so. You must come and see me when I am.
  --Very good.
  --When you're a great writer yourself -- as the author of a second
<Trilby> or something of that sort . . . Won't you come in?
  --Is it allowed?
  --O, with me . . . you come in, never mind.
  The two young men went into the grounds of the College and along the
circular carriage-drive. It was a damp evening and rather dark. In the
uncertain light a few of the more adventurous were to be seen
vigorously playing handball in a little side-alley, the smack of the
wet ball against the concrete wall of the alley alternating with their
lusty shouts. For the most part the students were walking in little
groups through the ground, some with their berretas [<sic>] pushed far
back to the nape of their necks and others holding their soutanes up
as women do with their skirts when they cross a muddy street.
  --Can you go with anyone you like? asked Stephen.
  --Companions are not allowed. You must join the first group you
meet.
  --Why didn't you go to the Jesuit order?
  --Not likely, my boy. Sixteen years of noviciate and no chance of
ever settling down. Here today, there tomorrow.
  As Stephen looked at the big square block of masonry looming before
them through the faint daylight, he re-entered again in thought the
seminarist life which he had led for so many years, to the
understanding of the narrow activities of which he could now in a
moment bring the spirit of an acute sympathetic alien. He recognised
at once the martial mind of the Irish Church in the style of this
ecclesiastical barracks. He looked in vain at the faces and figures
which passed him for a token of moral elevation: all were cowed
without being humble, modish without being simple-mannered. Some of
the students saluted Wells but got scanty thanks for the courtesy.
Wells wished Stephen to gather that he despised his fellow-students
and that it was not his fault if they regarded him as an important
person. At the foot of the stone steps he turned to Stephen:
  --I must go in to see the Dean for a minute. I'm afraid it's too
late for me to show you round the show this evening . . .
  --O, not at all. Another time.
  --Well, will you wait for me. Stroll along there towards the chapel.
I won't be a minute.
  He nodded at Stephen for a temporary farewell and sprang up the
steps. [Wells] Stephen wandered on towards the chapel meditatively
kicking a white flat stone along the grey pebbly path. He was not
likely to be deceived by Wells' words into an acceptance of that young
man as a quite vicious person. He knew that Wells had exaggerated his
airs in order to hide his internal sense of mortification at meeting
one who had not forsaken the world, the flesh and the devil and he
suspected that, if there were any tendency to oscillation in the soul
of the free-spoken young student, the iron hand of the discipline of
the Church would firmly intervene to restore equipoise. At the same
time Stephen felt somewhat indignant that anyone should expect him to
entrust spiritual difficulties to such a confessor or to receive with
pious feelings any sacrament or benediction from the hands of the
young students whom he saw walking through the grounds. It was not any
personal pride which would prevent him but a recognition of the
incompatibility of two natures, one trained to repressive enforcement
of a creed, the other equipped with a vision the angle of which would
never adjust itself for the reception of hallucinations and with an
intelligence which was as much in love with laughter as with combat.
  The mist of the evening had begun to thicken into slow fine rain and
Stephen halted at the end of a narrow path beside a few laurel bushes,
watching at the end of a leaf a tiny point of rain form and twinkle
and hesitate and finally take the plunge into the sodden clay beneath.
He wondered was it raining in Westmeath, [were the cattle standing
together patiently in the shelter of the hedges]. He remembered seeing
the cattle standing together patiently in the hedges and reeking in
the rain. A little band of students passed at the other side of the
laurel bushes: they were talking among themselves:
  --But did you see Mrs Bergin?
  --O, I saw her . . . with a black and white boa.
  --And the two Miss Kennedys were there.
  --Where?
  --Right behind the Archbishop's Throne.
  --O, I saw her -- one of them. Hadn't she a grey hat with a bird in
it?
  --That was her! She's very lady-like, isn't she.
  The little band went down the path. In a few minutes another little
band passed behind the bushes. One student was talking and the others
were listening.
  --Yes and an astronomer too: that's why he had [built] that
observatory built over there at the side of the palace. I heard a
priest say once that the three greatest men in Europe were Gladstone,
Bismarck (the great German statesman) and our own Archbishop -- as
all-round men. He knew him at Maynooth. He said that in Maynooth . . .
  The speaker's words were lost in the crunch of the heavy boots on
the gravel. The rain was spreading and increasing and the vagrant
bands of students were all turning their steps towards the college.
Stephen still waited at his post and at last saw Wells coming down the
path quickly: he had changed his outdoor dress for a soutane. He was
very apologetic and not quite so familiar in manner. Stephen wanted
him to go in with the others but he insisted on seeing his visitor to
the gate. They took a short cut down beside the wall and were soon
opposite the lodge. The [gate] side-door was shut and Wells called out
loudly to the lodge-woman to open it and let the gentleman out. Then
he shook hands with Stephen and pressed him to come again. The
lodge-woman opened the side-door and Wells looked out for a second or
two almost enviously. Then he said:
  --Well, goodbye, old man. Must run in now. Awfully glad to see you
again -- see any of the old Clongowes set, you know. Be good now: I
must run. Goodbye.
  As he tucked up his soutane high and ran awkwardly up the drive
[and] he looked a strange, almost criminal, fugitive in the dreary
dusk. Stephen's eyes followed the running figure for a moment: and as
he passed through the door into the lamplit street he smiled at his
own impulse of pity.


                                XIX


  He smiled because it seemed to him so unexpected a ripeness in
himself -- this pity -- or rather this impulse of pity for he had no
more than entertained it. But it was the actual achievement of his
essay which had allowed him so mature a pleasure as the sensation of
pity for another. Stephen had a thorough-going manner in many things:
his essay was not in the least the exhibition of polite
accomplishments. It was on the contrary very seriously intended to
define his own position for himself. He could not persuade himself
that, if he wrote round about his subject with facility or treated it
from any standpoint of impression, good would come of it. On the other
hand he was persuaded that no-one served the generation into which he
had been born so well as he who offered it, whether in his art or in
his life, the gift of certitude. The programme of the patriots filled
him with very reasonable doubts; its articles could obtain no
intellectual assent from him. He knew, moreover, that concordance with
it would mean for him a submission of everything else in its interest
and that he would thus be obliged to corrupt the springs of
speculation at their very source. He refused therefore to set out for
any task if he had first to prejudice his success by oaths to his
patria and this refusal resulted in a theory of art which was at once
severe and liberal. His Esthetic was in the main applied Aquinas, and
he set it forth plainly with a naif air of discovering novelties. This
he did partly to satisfy.his own taste for enigmatic roles and partly
from a genuine predisposition in favour of all but the premisses of
scholasticism. He proclaimed at the outset that art was the human
disposition of intelligible or sensible matter for an esthetic end,
and he announced further that all such human dispositions must fall
into the division of three distinct natural kinds, lyrical, epical and
dramatic. Lyrical art, he said, is the art whereby the artist sets
forth his image in immediate relation to himself; epical art is the
art whereby the artist sets forth his image in mediate relation to
himself and to others; and dramatic art is the art whereby the artist
sets forth his image in immediate relations to others. The various
forms of art, such as music, sculpture, literature, do not offer this
division with the same clearness and he concluded from this that those
forms of art which offered the division most clearly were to be called
the most excellent forms: and he was not greatly perturbed because he
could not decide for himself whether a portrait was a work of epical
art or not or whether it was possible for an architect to be a
lyrical, epical or dramatic poet at will. Having by this simple
process established the literary form of art as the most excellent he
proceeded to examine it in favour of his theory, or, as he rendered
it, to establish the relations which must subsist between the literary
image, the work of art itself, and that energy which had imagined and
fashioned it, that centre of conscious re-acting, particular life, the
artist.
  The artist, he imagined, standing in the position of mediator
between the world of his experience and the world of his dreams -- a
mediator, consequently gifted with twin faculties, a selective faculty
and a reproductive faculty. To equate these faculties was the secret
of artistic success: the artist who could disentangle the subtle soul
of the image from its mesh of defining circumstances most exactly and
re-embody it in artistic circumstances chosen as the most exact for it
in its new office, he was the supreme artist. This perfect coincidence
of the two artistic faculties Stephen called poetry and he imagined
the domain of an art to be cone-shaped. The term 'literature' now
seemed to him a term of contempt and he used it to designate the vast
middle region which lies between apex and base, between poetry and the
chaos of unremembered writing. Its merit lay in its portrayal of
externals; the realm of its princes was the realm of the manners and
customs of societies -- a spacious realm. But society is itself, he
conceived, the complex body in which certain laws are involved and
overwrapped and he therefore proclaimed as the realm of the poet the
realm of these unalterable laws. Such a theory might easily have led
its deviser to the acceptance of spiritual anarchy in literature had
he not at the same time insisted on the classical style. A classical
style, he said, is the syllogism of art, the only legitimate process
from one world to another. Classicism is not the manner of any fixed
age or of any fixed country: it is a constant state of the artistic
mind. It is a temper of security and satisfaction and patience. The
romantic temper, so often and so grievously misinterpreted and not
more by others than by its own, is an insecure, unsatisfied, impatient
temper which sees no fit abode here for its ideals and chooses
therefore to behold them under insensible figures. As a result of this
choice it comes to disregard certain limitations. Its figures are
blown to wild adventures, lacking the gravity of solid bodies, and the
mind that has conceived them ends by disowning them. The classical
temper on the other hand, ever mindful of limitations, chooses rather
to bend upon these present things and so to work upon them and fashion
them that the quick intelligence may go beyond them to their meaning
which is still unuttered. In this method the sane and joyful spirit
issues forth and achieves imperishable perfection, nature assisting
with her goodwill and thanks. For so long as this place in nature is
given us it is right that art should do no violence to the gift.
  Between these two conflicting schools the city of the arts had
become marvellously unpeaceful. To many spectators the dispute had
seemed a dispute about names, a battle in which the position of the
standards could never be foretold for a minute. Add to this
internecine warfare -- the classical school fighting the materialism
that must attend it, the romantic school struggling to preserve
coherence -- and behold from what ungentle manners criticism is bound
to recognise the emergence of all achievement. The critic is he who is
able, by means of the signs which the artist affords, to approach the
temper which has made the work and to see what is well done therein
and what it signifies. For him a song by Shakespeare which seems so
free and living, as remote from any conscious purpose as rain that
falls in a garden or as the lights of evening, discovers itself as the
rhythmic speech of an emotion otherwise incommunicable, or at least
not so fitly. But to approach the temper which has made art is an act
of reverence before the performance of which many conventions must be
first put off for certainly that inmost region will never yield its
secret to one who is enmeshed with profanities.
  Chief among these profanities Stephen set the antique principle that
the end of art is to instruct, to elevate, and to amuse. "I am unable
to find even a trace of this Puritanic conception of the esthetic
purpose in the definition which Aquinas has given of beauty" he wrote
"or in anything which he has written concerning the beautiful. The
qualifications he expects for beauty are in fact of so abstract and
common a character that it is quite impossible for even the most
violent partizan to use the Aquinatian theory with the object of
attacking any work of art that we possess from the hand of any artist
whatsoever." This recognition of the beautiful in virtue of the most
abstract relations afforded by an object to which the term could be
applied so far from giving any support to a commandment of <Noli
Tangere> was itself no more than a just sequence from the taking-off
of all interdictions from the artist. The limits of decency suggest
themselves somewhat too readily to the modern speculator and their
effect is to encourage the profane mind to very futile jurisdiction.
For it cannot be urged too strongly on the public mind that the
tradition of art is with the artists and that even if they do not make
it their invariable practice to outrage these limits of decency the
public mind has no right to conclude therefrom that they do not
arrogate for themselves an entire liberty to do so if they choose. It
is as absurd, wrote the fiery-hearted revolutionary, for a criticism
itself established upon homilies to prohibit the elective courses of
the artist in his <revelation> of the beautiful as it would be for a
police-magistrate to prohibit the sum of any two sides of a triangle
from being together greater than the third side.
  In fine the truth is not that the artist requires a document of
licence from householders entitling him to proceed in this or that
fashion but that every age must look for its sanction to its poets and
philosophers. The poet is the intense centre of the life of his age to
which he stands in a relation than which none can be more vital. He
alone is capable of absorbing in himself the life that surrounds him
and of flinging it abroad again amid planetary music. When the poetic
phenomenon is signalled in the heavens, exclaimed this
heaven-ascending essayist, it is time for the critics to verify their
calculations in accordance with it. It is time for them to acknowledge
that here the imagination has contemplated intensely the truth of the
being of the visible world and that beauty, the splendour of truth,
has been born. The age, though it bury itself fathoms deep in formulas
and machinery, has need of these realities which alone give and
sustain life and it must await from those chosen centres of
vivification the force to live, the security for life which can come
to it only from them. Thus the spirit of man makes a continual
affirmation.
  Except for the eloquent and arrogant peroration Stephen's essay was
a careful exposition of a carefully meditated theory of esthetic. When
he had finished it he found it necessary to change the title from
"Drama and Life" to "Art and Life" for he had occupied himself so much
with securing the foundations that he had not left himself space
enough to raise the complete structure. This strangely unpopular
manifesto was traversed by the two brothers phrase by phrase and word
by word and at last pronounced flawless at all points. It was then
safely laid by until the time should come for its public appearance.
Besides Maurice two other well-wishers had an advance view of it;
these were Stephen's mother and his friend Madden. Madden had not
asked for it directly but at the end of a conversation in which
Stephen had recounted sarcastically his visit to Clonliffe College he
had vaguely wondered what state of mind could produce such
irreverences and Stephen had at once offered him the manuscript saying
"This is the first of my explosives." The following evening Madden had
returned the manuscript and praised the writing highly. Part of it had
been too deep for him, he said, but he could see that it was
beautifully written.
  --You know Stevie, he said ( Madden had a brother Stephen and he
sometimes used this familiar form) you always told me I was a country
<buachail> and I can't understand you mystical fellows.
  --Mystical? said Stephen.
  --About the planets and the stars, you know. Some of the fellows in
the League belong to the mystical set here. They'd understand quick
enough.
  --But there's nothing mystical in it I tell you. I have written it
carefully . . .
  --O, I can see you have. It's beautifully written. But I'm sure it
will be above the heads of your audience.
  --You don't mean to tell me, Madden, you think it's a 'flowery'
composition!
  --I know you've thought it out. But you are a poet, aren't you?
  --I have . . . written verse . . . if that's what you mean.
  --Do you know Hughes is a poet too?
  --Hughes!
  --Yes. He writes for our paper, you know. Would you like to see some
of his poetry?
  --Why, could you show me any?
  --It so happens I have one in my pocket. There's one in this week's
<Sword> too. Here it is: read it.
  Stephen took the paper and read a piece of verse entitled <Mo Naire
Tu> (My shame art thou). There were four stanzas in the piece and each
stanza ended with the Irish phrase -- <Mo Naire Tu>, the last word, of
course, rhyming to an English word in the corresponding line. The
piece began:

           What! Shall the rippling tongue of Gaels
           Give way before the Saxon slang!

and in lines full of excited patriotism proceeded to pour scorn upon
the Irishman who would not learn the ancient language of his native
land. Stephen did not remark anything in the lines except the
frequency of such contracted forms as "e'en" "ne'er" and "thro' "
instead of "even" "never" and "through" and he handed back the paper
to Madden without offering any comment on the verse.
  --I suppose you don't like that because it's too Irish but you'll
like this, I suppose, because it's that mystical, idealistic kind of
writing you poets indulge in. Only you mustn't say I let you see . . .
  --O, no.
  Madden took from his inside pocket a sheet of foolscap folded in
four on which was inscribed a piece of verse, consisting of four
stanzas of eight lines each, entitled "My Ideal." Each stanza began
with the words "Art thou real?" The poem told of the poet's troubles
in a 'vale of woe' and of the 'heart-throbs' which these troubles
caused him. It told of 'weary nights' and 'anxious days' and of an
'unquenchable desire' for an excellence beyond that 'which earth can
give.' After this mournful idealism the final stanza offered a certain
consolatory, hypothetical alternative to the poet in his woes: it
began somewhat hopefully:

            Art thou real, my Ideal?
            Wilt thou ever come to me
            In the soft and gentle twilight
            With your baby on your knee?

The [combined] effect of this apparition on Stephen was a long
staining blush of anger. The tawdry lines, the futile change of
number, the ludicrous waddling approach of Hughes's "Ideal" weighed
down by an inexplicable infant combined to cause him a sharp agony in
the sensitive region. Again he handed back the verse without saying a
word of praise or of blame but he decided that attendance in Mr
Hughes's class was no longer possible for him and he was foolish
enough to regret having yielded to the impulse for sympathy from a
friend.
  When a demand for intelligent sympathy goes unanswered [it] he is a
too stern disciplinarian who blames himself for having offered a
dullard an opportunity to participate in the warmer movement of a more
highly organised life. So Stephen regarded his loans of manuscripts as
elaborate flag-practices with phrases. He did not consider his mother
a dullard but the result of his second disappointment in the search
for appreciation was that he was enabled to place the blame on the
shoulders of others -- not on his own: he had enough responsibilities
thereon already, inherited and acquired. His mother had not asked to
see the manuscript: she had continued to iron the clothes on the
kitchen-table without the least suspicion of the agitation in the mind
of her son. He had sat on three or four kitchen chairs, one after
another, and had dangled his legs unsuccessfully from all free corners
of the table. At last, unable to control his agitation, he asked her
point-blank would she like him to read out his essay.
  --O, yes, Stephen -- if you don't mind my ironing a few things . . .
  --No, I don't mind.
  Stephen read out the essay to her slowly and emphatically and when
he had finished reading she said it was very beautifully written but
that as there were some things in it which she couldn't follow, would
he mind reading it to her again and explaining some of it. He read it
over again and allowed himself a long exposition of his theories
garnished with many crude striking allusions with which he hoped to
drive it home the better. His mother who had never suspected probably
that "beauty" could be anything more than a convention of the
drawingroom or a natural antecedent to marriage and married life was
surprised to see the extraordinary honour which her son conferred upon
it. Beauty, to the mind of such a woman, was often a synonym for
licentious ways and probably for this reason she was relieved to find
that the excesses of this new worship were supervised by a recognised
saintly authority. However as the essayist's recent habits were not
very re-assuring she decided to combine a discreet motherly solicitude
with an interest, which without being open to the accusation of
factitiousness was at first intended as a compliment. While she was
nicely folding a handkerchief she said:
  --What does Ibsen write, Stephen?
  --Plays.
  --I never heard of his name before. Is he alive at present?
  --Yes, he is. But, you know, in Ireland people don't know much about
what is going on out in Europe.
  --He must be a great writer from what you say of him.
  --Would you like to read some of his plays, mother? I have some.
  --Yes. I would like to read the best one. What is the best one?
  --I don't know . . . But do you really want to read Ibsen?
  --I do, really.
  --To see whether I am reading dangerous authors or not, is that why?
  --No, Stephen, answered his mother with a brave prevarication. I
think you're old enough now to know what is right and what is wrong
without my dictating to you what you are to read.
  --I think so too . . . But I'm surprised to hear you ask about
Ibsen. I didn't imagine you took the least interest in these matters.
  Mrs Daedalus pushed her iron smoothly over a white petticoat in time
to the current of her memory.
  --Well, of course, I don't speak about it but I'm not so indifferent
. . . Before I married your father I used to read a great deal. I used
to take an interest in all kinds of new plays.
  --But since you married neither of you so much as bought a single
book!
  --Well, you see, Stephen, your father is not like you: he takes no
interest in that sort of thing . . . When he was young he told me he
used to spend all his time out after the hounds or rowing on the Lee.
He went in for athletics.
  --I suspect what he went in for, said Stephen irreverently. I know
he doesn't care a jack straw about what I think or what I write.
  --He wants to see you make your way, get on in life, said his mother
defensively. That's his ambition. You shouldn't blame him for that.
  --No, no, no. But it may not be my ambition. That kind of life I
often loathe: I find it ugly and cowardly.
  --Of course life isn't what I used to think it was when I was a
young girl. That's why I would like to read some great writer, to see
what ideal of life he has -- amn't I right in saying "ideal"?
  --Yes, but . . .
  --Because sometimes -- not that I grumble at the lot Almighty God
has given me and I have more or less a happy life with your father --
but sometimes I feel that I want to leave this actual life and enter
another -- for a time.
  --But that is wrong: that is the great mistake everyone makes. Art
is not an escape from life!
  --No?
  --You evidently weren't listening to what I said or else you didn't
understand what I said. Art is not an escape from life. It's just the
very opposite. Art, on the contrary, is the very central expression of
life. An artist is not a fellow who dangles a mechanical heaven before
the public. The priest does that. The artist affirms out of the
fulness of his own life, he creates . . . Do you understand?
  And so on. A day or two afterwards Stephen gave his mother a few of
the plays to read. She read them with great interest and found Nora
Helmer a charming character. Dr Stockmann she admired but her
admiration was naturally checked by her son's light-heartedly
blasphemous description of that stout burgher as 'Jesus in a
frock-coat.' But the play which she preferred to all others was the
<Wild Duck>. Of it she spoke readily and on her own initiative: it had
moved her deeply. Stephen, to escape a charge of hot-headedness and
partizanship, did not encourage her to an open record of her feelings.
  --I hope you're not going to mention Little Nell in the <Old
Curiosity Shop>.
  --Of course I like Dickens too but I can see a great difference
between Little Nell and that poor little creature -- what is her name?
. . .
  --Hedvig Ekdal?
  --Hedvig, yes ... It's so sad: it's terrible to read it even . . . I
quite agree with you that Ibsen is a wonderful writer.
  --Really?
  --Yes, really. His plays have impressed me very much.
  --Do you think he is immoral?
  --Of course, you know, Stephen, he treats of subjects . of which I
know very little myself . . . subjects .
  --Subjects which, you think, should never be talked about?
  --Well, that was the old people's idea but I don't know if it was
right. I don't know if it is good for people to be entirely ignorant.
  --Then why not treat them openly?
  --I think it might do harm to some people -- uneducated, unbalanced
people. People's natures are so different. You perhaps . . .
  --O, never mind me . . . Do you think these plays are unfit for
people to read?
  --No, I think they're magnificent plays indeed.
  --And not immoral?
  --I think that Ibsen . . . has an extraordinary knowledge of human
nature . . . And I think that human nature is a very extraordinary
thing sometimes.
  Stephen had to be contented with this well-worn generality as he
recognised in it a genuine sentiment. His mother, in fact, had so far
evangelised herself that she undertook the duties of missioner to the
heathen; that is to say, she offered some of the plays to her husband
to read. He listened to her praises with a somewhat startled air,
observing no feature of her face, his eyeglass screwed into an
astonished eye and his mouth poised in naif surprise. He was always
interested in novelties, childishly interested and receptive, and this
new name and the phenomena it had produced in his house were novelties
for him. He made no attempt to discredit his wife's novel development
but he resented both that she should have achieved it unaided by him
and that she should be able thereby to act as intermediary between him
and his son. He condemned as inopportune but not discredited his son's
wayward researches into strange literature and, though a similar taste
was not discoverable in him, he was prepared to commit that most pious
of heroisms namely the extension of one's sympathies late in life in
deference to the advocacy of a junior. Following the custom of certain
old-fashioned people who can never understand why their patronage or
judgments should put men of letters into a rage he chose his play from
the title. A metaphor is a vice that attracts the dull mind by reason
of its aptness and repels the too serious mind by reason of its
falsity and danger so that, after all, there is something to be said,
nothing voluminous perhaps, but at least a word of concession for that
class of society which in literature as in everything else goes always
with its four feet on the ground. Mr Daedalus, anyhow, suspected that
<A Doll's House> would be a triviality in the manner of <Little Lord
Fauntleroy> and, as he had never been even unofficially a member of
that international society which collects and examines psychical
phenomena, he decided that <Ghosts> would probably be some
uninteresting story about a haunted house. He chose the <League of
Youth> in which he hoped to find the reminiscences of like-minded
roysterers and, after reading through two acts of provincial intrigue,
abandoned the enterprise as tedious. He had promised himself, arguing
from the alienated attitudes and half-deferential half-words of
pressmen at the mention of the name, a certain extravagance, perhaps
an anomalous torridity of the North and [he] though the name beneath
Ibsen's photograph never failed to reawaken his sense of wonder, the
upright line of the "b" running so strangely beside the initial letter
as to suspend [one] the mind amid incertitudes for some oblivious
instants, the final impression made upon him by the figure to which
the name was affixed, a figure which he associated with a solicitor's
or a stockbroker's office in Dame St, was an impression of
[disappointment mixed] relief mixed with disappointment, the relief
for his son's sake prevailing dutifully over his own slight but real
disappointment. So that from neither of Stephen's parents did
respectability get full allegiance.
  A week before the date fixed for the reading of the paper Stephen
consigned a small packet covered with neat characters into the
Auditor's hands. McCann smacked his lips and put the manuscript into
the inside pocket of his coat:
  --I'll read this tonight and I'll see you here at the same hour
tomorrow. I think I know all that is in it beforehand.
  The next [evening] afternoon McCann reported: -- Well, I've read
your paper.
  --Well?
  --Brilliantly written -- a bit strong, it seems to me. However I
gave it to the President this morning to read.
  --What for?
  --All the papers must be submitted to him first for approval, you
know.
  --Do you mean to say, said Stephen scornfully, that the President
must approve of my paper before I can read it to your society!
  --Yes. He's the Censor.
  --What a valuable society!
  --Why not?
  --It's only child's play, man. You remind me of children in the
nursery.
  --Can't be helped. We must take what we can get.
  --Why not put up the shutters at once?
  --Well, it is valuable. It trains young men for public speaking --
for the bar and the political platform.
  --Mr Daniel could say as much for his charades.
  --I daresay he could.
  --So this Censor of yours is inspecting my essay?
  --Well. He's liberal-minded .
  --Ay.
  While the two young men were holding this conversation on the steps
of the Library, Whelan, the College orator came up to them. This suave
rotund young man, who was the Secretary of the Society, was reading
for the Bar. His eyes regarded Stephen now with mild, envious horror
and he forgot all his baggage from Attica:
  --Your essay is tabu, Daedalus.
  --Who said so?
  --The Very Reverend Dr Dillon.
  The delivery of this news was followed by a silence during which
Whelan slowly moistened his lower lip with saliva from his tongue and
McCann made ready to shrug his shoulders.
  --Where is the damned old fool? said the essayist promptly.
  Whelan blushed and pointed his thumb over his shoulder. Stephen in a
moment was half across the quadrangle. McCann called after him:
  --Where are you going?
  Stephen halted but, discovering that he was too angry to trust
himself to speak, he merely pointed in the direction of the College,
and went forward quickly.
  So after all his trouble, thinking out his essay and composing his
periods, this old fogey was about to prohibit it! His indignation
settled into a mood of politic contempt as he crossed the Green. The
clock in the hall of the College pointed to half past three as Stephen
addressed the doddering door-porter. He had to speak twice, the second
time with a distinct, separated enunciation, for the door-porter was
rather stupid and deaf:
  --Can -- I -- see -- the -- President?
  The President was not in his room: he was saying his office in the
garden. Stephen went out into the garden and went down towards the
ball-alley. A small figure wrapped in a loose Spanish-looking black
cloak presented its back to him near the far end of the side-walk. The
figure went on slowly to the end of the walk, halted there for a few
moments, and then turning about presented to him over the edge of a
breviary a neat round head covered with curly grey hair and a very
wrinkled face of an indescribable colour: the upper part was the
colour of putty and the lower part was shot with slate colour. The
President came slowly down the side-walk, in his capacious cloak,
noiselessly moving his grey lips as he said his office. At the end of
the walk he halted again and looked inquiringly at Stephen. Stephen
raised his cap and said "Good evening, sir." The President answered
with the smile which a pretty girl gives when she receives some
compliment which puzzles her -- a 'winning smile:
  --What can I do for you? he asked in a [wonderfully] rich deep
calculated voice.
  --I understand, said Stephen, that you wish to see me about my essay
-- an essay I have written for the Debating Society.
  --O, you are Mr Daedalus, said the President more seriously but
still agreeably.
  --Perhaps I am disturbing . . .
  --No, I have finished my office, said the President.
  He [started] began to walk slowly down the path at such a pace as
implied invitation. Stephen kept therefore at his side.
  --I admire the style of your paper, he said firmly, very much but I
do not approve at all of your theories. I am afraid I cannot allow you
to read your paper before the Society.
  They walked on to the end of the path, without speaking. Then
Stephen said:
  --Why, sir?
  --I cannot encourage you to disseminate such theories among the
young men in this college.
  --You think my theory of art is a false one?
  --It is certainly not the theory of art which is respected in this
college.
  --I agree with that, said Stephen.
  --On the contrary, it represents the sum-total of modern unrest and
modern freethinking. The authors you quote as examples, those you seem
to admire . . .
  --Aquinas?
  --Not Aquinas; I have to speak of him in a moment. But Ibsen,
Maeterlinck . . . these atheistic writers . . .
  --You do not like . . .
  --I am surprised that any student of this college could find
anything to admire in such writers, writers who usurp the name of
poet, who openly profess their atheistic doctrines and fill the minds
of their readers with all the garbage of modern society. That is not
art.
  --Even admitting the corruption you speak of I see nothing unlawful
in an examination of corruption.
  --Yes, it may be lawful -- for the scientist, for the reformer . . .
  --Why not for the poet too? Dante surely examines and upbraids
society.
  --Ah, yes, said the President explanatorily, with a moral purpose in
view: Dante was a great poet.
  --Ibsen is also a great poet.
  --You cannot compare Dante and Ibsen.
  --I am not doing so.
  --Dante, the lofty upholder of beauty, the greatest of Italian
poets, and Ibsen, the writer above and beyond all others, Ibsen and
Zola, who seek to degrade their art, who pander to a corrupt taste . .
.
  --But you are comparing them!
  --No, you cannot compare them. One has a high moral aim -- he
ennobles the human race: the other degrades it.
  --The lack of a specific code of moral conventions does not
degrade the poet, in my opinion.
  --Ah, if he were to examine even the basest things, said the
President with a suggestion of tolerance in store, [that] it would be
different if he were to examine and then show men the way to purify
themselves.
  --That is for the Salvationists, said Stephen.
  --Do you mean . . .
  --I mean that Ibsen's account of modern society is as genuinely
ironical as Newman's account of English Protestant morality and
belief.
  --That may be, said the President appeased by the conjunction.
  --And as free from any missionary intention.
  The President was silent.
  --It is a question of temper. Newman could refrain from writing his
Apologia for twenty years.
  --But when he came out on him! said the President with a chuckle and
an expressive incompletion of the phrase. Poor Kingsley!
  --It is all a question of temper -- one's attitude towards society
whether one is poet or critic.
  --O, yes.
  --Ibsen has the temper of an archangel.
  --It may be: but I have always believed that he was a fierce realist
like Zola with some kind of a new doctrine to preach.
  --You were mistaken, sir.
  --This is the general opinion.
  --A mistaken one.
  --I understood he had some doctrine or other -- a social doctrine,
free living, and an artistic doctrine, unbridled licence -- so much so
that the public will not tolerate his plays on the stage and that you
cannot name him even in mixed society.
  --Where have you seen this?
  --O, everywhere . . . in the papers.
  --This is a serious argument, said Stephen reprovingly.
  The president far from resenting this hardy statement seemed to bow
to its justice: no-one could have a poorer opinion of the
half-educated journalism of the present day than he had and he
certainly would not allow a newspaper to dictate criticism to him. At
the same time there was such a unanimity of opinion everywhere about
Ibsen that he imagined . . .
  --May I ask you if you have read much of his writing? asked Stephen.
  --Well, no . . . I must say I . . .
  --May I ask you if you have read even a single line?
  --Well, no . . . I must admit . . .
  --And surely you do not think it right to pass judgment on a writer
a single line of whose writing you have never read?
  --Yes, I must admit that.
  Stephen hesitated after this first success. The President resumed:
  --I am very interested in the enthusiasm you show for this writer. I
have never had any opportunity to read Ibsen myself but I know that he
enjoys a great reputation. What you say of him, I must confess, alters
my view of him considerably. Some day perhaps I shall . . .
  --I can lend you some of the plays if you like, sir, said Stephen
with imprudent simplicity.
  --Can you indeed?
  Both paused for an instant: then -- 
  --You will see that he is a great poet and a great artist, said
Stephen.
  --I shall be very interested, said the President with an amiable
intention, to read some of his work for myself. I certainly shall.
  Stephen had an impulse to say "Excuse me for five minutes while I
send a telegram to Christiania" but he resisted his impulse. During
the interview he had occasion more than once to put severe shackles on
this importunate devil within him whose appetite was on edge for the
farcical. The President was beginning to exhibit the liberal side of
his character, but with priestly cautiousness.
  --Yes, I shall be most interested. Your opinions are somewhat
strange. Do you intend to publish this essay?
  --Publish it!
  --I should not care for anyone to identify the ideas in your essay
with the teaching in our college. We receive this college in trust.
  --But you are not supposed to be responsible for everything a
student in your college thinks or says.
  --No, of course not . . . but, reading your essay and knowing you
came from our college, people would suppose that we inculcated such
ideas here.
  --Surely a student of this college can pursue a special line of
study if he chooses.
  --It is just that which we always try to encourage in our students
but your study, it seems to me, leads you to adopt very revolutionary
. . . very revolutionary theories.
  --If I were to publish tomorrow a very revolutionary pamphlet on the
means of avoiding potato-blight would you consider yourself
responsible for my theory?
  --No, no, of course not . . . but then this is not a school of
agriculture.
  --Neither is it a school of dramaturgy, answered Stephen.
  --Your argument is not so conclusive as it seems, said the President
after a short pause. However I am glad to see that your attitude
towards your subject is so genuinely serious. At the same time you
must admit that this theory you have -- if pushed to its logical
conclusion -- would emancipate the poet from all moral laws. I notice
too that in your essay you allude satirically to what you call the
'antique' theory -- the theory, namely, that the drama should have
special ethical aims, that it should instruct, elevate and amuse. I
suppose you mean Art for Art's sake.
  --I have only pushed to its logical conclusion the definition
Aquinas has given of the beautiful.
  --Aquinas?
  --<Pulcra sunt quae visa placent>. He seems to regard the beautiful
as that which satisfies the esthetic appetite and nothing more -- that
the mere apprehension of which pleases . . .
  --But he means the sublime -- that which leads man upwards.
  --His remark would apply to a Dutch painter's representation of a
plate of onions.
  --No, no; that which pleases the soul in a state of sanctification,
the soul seeking its spiritual good.
  --Aquinas' definition of the good is an unsafe basis of operations:
it is very wide. He seems to me almost ironical in his treatment of
the "appetites."
  The President scratched his head a little dubiously -- 
  --Of course Aquinas is an extraordinary mind, he murmured, the
greatest doctor of the Church: but he requires immense interpretation.
There are parts of Aquinas which no priest would think of announcing
in the pulpit.
  --But what if I, as an artist, refuse to accept the cautions which
are considered necessary for those who are still in a state of
original stupidity?
  --I believe you are sincere but I will tell you this as an older
human being than you are and as a man of some experience: the cult of
beauty is difficult. Estheticism often begins well only to end in the
vilest abominations of which .
  --<Ad pulcritudinem tria requiruntur>.
  --It is insidious, it creeps into the mind, little by little . . .
  --<Integritas, consonantia, claritas>. There seems to me to be
effulgence in that theory instead of danger. The intelligent nature
apprehends it at once.
  --S. Thomas of course . . .
  --Aquinas is certainly on the side of the capable artist. I hear no
mention of instruction or elevation.
  --To support Ibsenism on Aquinas seems to me somewhat paradoxical.
Young men often substitute brilliant paradox for conviction.
  --My conviction has led me nowhere: my theory states itself.
  --Ah, you are a paradoxist, said the President smiling with gentle
satisfaction. I can see that . . . And there is another thing -- a
question of taste perhaps rather than anything else -- which makes me
think your theory juvenile. You don't seem to understand the
importance of the classical drama . . . Of course in his own line
Ibsen also may be an admirable writer . . .
  --But, allow me, sir, said Stephen. My entire esteem is for the
classical temper in art. Surely you must remember that I said . . .
  --So far as I can remember, said the President lifting to the pale
sky a faintly smiling face on which memory endeavoured to bring a
vacuous amiability to book, so far as I can remember you treated the
Greek drama -- the classical temper -- very summarily indeed, with a
kind of juvenile . . . impudence, shall I say?
  --But the Greek drama is heroic, monstruous. [<sic>] Eschylus is not
a classical writer!
  --I told you you were a paradoxist, Mr Daedalus. You wish to upset
centuries of literary criticism by a brilliant turn of speech, by a
paradox.
  --I use the word 'classical' in a certain sense, with a certain
definite meaning, that is all.
  --But you cannot use any terminology you like.
  --I have not changed the terms. I have explained them. By
'classical' I mean the slow elaborative patience of the art of
satisfaction. The heroic, the fabulous, I call romantic. Menander
perhaps, I don't know . . .
  --All the world recognises Eschylus as a supreme classical
dramatist.
  --O, the world of professors whom he helps to feed . . .
  --Competent critics, said the President severely, men of the highest
culture. And even the public themselves can appreciate him. I have
read, I think, in some . . . a newspaper, I think it was . . . that
Irving, the great actor, Henry Irving produced one of his plays in
London and that the London public flocked to see it.
  --From curiosity. The London public will flock to see anything new
or strange. If Irving were to give an imitation of a hard-boiled egg
they would flock to see it.
  The President received this absurdity with unflenching gravity and
when he had come to the end of the path, he halted for a few instants
before leading the way to the house.
  --I do not predict much success for your advocacy in this country,
he said generally. Our people have their faith and they are happy.
They are faithful to their Church and the Church is sufficient for
them. Even for the profane world these modern pessimistic writers are
a little too . . . too much.
  With his scornful mind scampering from Clonliffe College to
Mullingar Stephen strove to make himself ready for some definite
compact. The President had carefully brought the interview into the
region of chattiness.
  --Yes, we are happy. Even the English people have begun to see the
folly of these morbid tragedies, these wretched unhappy, unhealthy
tragedies. I read the other day that some playwright had to change the
last act of his play because it ended in catastrophe -- some sordid
murder or suicide or death.
  --Why not make death a capital offence? said Stephen. People are
very timorous. It would be so much simpler to take the bull by the
horns and have done with it.
  When they reached the hall of the College the President stood at the
foot of the staircase before going up to his room. Stephen waited
silently:
  --Begin to look at the bright side of things, Mr Daedalus. Art
should be healthy first of all.
  The President gathered in his soutane for the ascent with a slow
hermaphroditic gesture:
  --I must say you have defended your theory very well . . . very well
indeed. I do not agree with it, of course, but I can see you have
thought it all out carefully beforehand. You have thought it out
carefully?
  --Yes, I have.
  --It is very interesting -- a little paradoxical at times and a
little juvenile -- but I have been very interested in it. I am sure
too that when your studies have brought you further afield you will be
able to amend it so as to -- fit in more with recognised facts; I am
sure you will be able to apply it better then -- when your mind has
undergone a course of . . . regular . . . training and you have a
larger, wider sense of . . . comparison .


                                 XX


  The President's indefinite manner of closing the interview had left
some doubts in Stephen's mind; he was unable to decide whether the
retreat upstairs was a breach of friendly relations or a politic
confession of inability. However as no definite prohibition had been
pronounced upon him he determined to proceed calmly on his way until
he encountered a substantial check. When he met McCann again he smiled
and waited to be questioned. His account of the interview went the
rounds of the undergraduate classes and he was much amused to observe
the startled expression of many pairs of eyes which, to judge from
their open humiliated astonishment, appeared to behold in him
characteristics of a moral Nelson. Maurice listened to his brother's
account of his battle with recognised authority but he made no remark
upon it. Stephen himself, in default of another's service, began to
annotate the incident copiously, expending every suggestive phase of
the interview. He consumed much imaginative fuel in this diverting
chase of the presumable and his rapid changeful courses kindled in him
a flame of discontent for Maurice's impassiveness:
  --Are you listening to me at all? Do you know what I'm talking
about?
  --Yes, it's all right . . . You can read your paper, can't you?
  --Yes, of course, I can . . . But what's up with you? Are you bored?
Are you thinking of anything?
  --Well . . . yes, I am.
  --What?
  --I have found out why I feel different this evening. Why, do you
think?
  --I don't know. Tell us.
  --I have been walking [on] from the ball of my left foot. I usually
walk from the ball of my right foot.
  Stephen looked sideways at the speaker's solemn face to see if there
were any signs thereon of a satirical mood but, finding only steadfast
self-analysis, he said:
  --Indeed? That's damned interesting.
  On the Saturday night which had been fixed for the reading of the
paper Stephen found himself facing the benches in the Physics'
Theatre. While the minutes were being read out by the secretary he had
time to observe his father's eyeglass glimmering high up near the
window and he divined more than saw the burly form of Mr Casey hard by
that observant centre. He could not see his brother but in the front
benches he noticed Father Butt and McCann and two other priests. The
chairman was Mr Keane, the professor of English composition. When the
formal business was ended the chairman called on the essayist to read
his paper and Stephen stood up. He waited until a compliment of
discreet applause had subsided, and until McCann's energetic hands had
given four resounding claps as a concluding solo of welcome. Then he
read out his essay. He read it quietly and distinctly, involving every
hardihood of thought or expression in an envelope of low innocuous
melody. He read it on calmly to the end: his reading was never once
interrupted with applause: and when he had read out the final
sentences in a tone of metallic clearness he sat down.
  The first single thought that emerged through a swift mood of
confusion was the bright conviction that he should never have written
his essay. While he was gloomily taking counsel with himself as to
whether he should fling the manuscript at their heads and march home
or remain as he was shading his face from the light of the candles on
the Chairman's table he became aware that the discussion on his paper
had begun: this discovery surprised him. Whelan, the orator of the
College, was proposing a vote of thanks and wagging his head in time
to ornate phrases. Stephen wondered did anyone else observe the
infantile movements of the orator's mouth. He wished that Whelan would
shut his jaws with a clap so as to reveal the presence of solid teeth;
the mere sound of the speech reminded him of the noise Nurse Sarah
used to make when she mashed Isabel's bread-and-milk in the blue bowl
which his mother now used to hold starch. But he at once corrected
himself for such a manner of criticism and strove to listen to the
words of the orator. Whelan was profusely admiring he felt (he said)
during the reading of Mr Daedalus' essay as though he had been
listening to the discourse of angels and did not know the language
that they spoke. It was with some diffidence that he ventured to
criticise but it was evident that Mr Daedalus did not understand the
beauty of the Attic theatre. He pointed out that Eschylus was an
imperishable name and he predicted that the drama of the Greeks would
outlive many civilisations. Stephen noticed that Whelan said
'yisterday' twice instead of 'yesterday' in imitation of Father Butt
who was a South of England man and he speculated as to whether it was
a Dominican preacher or a Jesuit preacher [that] who had given the
orator his final phrase. "Greek art" said Whelan "is not for a time
but for all times. It stands aloof, alone. It is imperial, imperious
and imperative."
  McCann seconded the vote of thanks which had been so ably proposed
by Mr Whelan and he desired to add his tribute to Mr Whelan's eloquent
tribute to the essayist of the night. There were perhaps many things
in the paper which Mr Daedalus had read to them with which he could
not agree, but he was not such a blind partizan of antiquity for
antiquity's sake as Mr Whelan seemed to be. Modern ideas must find
their expression: the modern world had to face pressing problems: and
he considered that any writer who could call attention to those
problems in a striking way was well worthy of every serious person's
consideration. He considered that he was speaking for one and all of
those present when he said that Mr Daedalus, by reading his frank and
earnest essay that night, had conferred a benefit on the society.
  The general diversion of the night began when these two opening
speeches had ended. Stephen was subjected to the fires of six or seven
hostile speakers. One speaker, a young man named Magee, said he was
surprised that any paper which was conceived in a spirit so hostile to
the spirit of religion itself -- he did not know if Mr Daedalus
understood the true purport of the theory he propounded -- should find
approval in their society. Who but the Church had sustained and
fostered the artistic temper? Had not the drama owed its very birth to
religion? That was indeed a poor theory which tried to bolster up the
dull dramas of sinful intrigues and to decry the immortal
masterpieces. Mr Magee said he did not know as much about Ibsen as Mr
Daedalus did -- nor did he want to know anything about him -- but he
knew that one of his plays was about the sanitary condition of a
bathing-place. If this was drama he did not see why some Dublin
Shakespeare should not pen an immortal work dealing with the new Main
Drainage Scheme of the Dublin Corporation. This speech was the signal
for a general attack. The essay was pronounced a jingle of meaningless
words, a clever presentation of vicious principles in the guise of
artistic theories, a reproduction of the decadent literary opinions of
exhausted European capitals. The essayist was supposed to intend parts
of his essay as efforts at practical joking: everyone knew that
<Macbeth> would be famous when the unknown authors of whom Mr Daedalus
was so fond were dead and forgotten. Ancient art loved to uphold the
beautiful and the sublime: modern art might select other themes: but
those who still preserved their minds uncontaminated by atheistic
poisons would know which to choose. The climax of aggressiveness was
reached when Hughes stood up. He declared in ringing Northern accents
that the moral welfare of the Irish people was menaced by such
theories. They wanted no foreign filth. Mr Daedalus might read what
authors he liked, of course, but the Irish people had their own
glorious literature where they could always find fresh ideals to spur
them on to new patriotic endeavours. Mr Daedalus was himself a
renegade from the Nationalist ranks: he professed cosmopolitism. But a
man that was of all countries was of no country -- you must first have
a nation before you have art. Mr Daedalus might do as he pleased,
kneel at the shrine of Art (with a capital A), and rave about obscure
authors. In spite of [his] any hypocritical use of the name of a great
doctor of the Church Ireland would be on her guard against the
insidious theory that art can be separated from morality. It they were
to have art let it be moral art, art that elevated, above all,
national art,

            Kindly Irish of the Irish,
            Neither Saxon nor Italian.

  When the time had come for the Chairman to sum up and to put the
motion before the house there was the usual pause. In this pause
Father Butt rose and begged leave to say a few words. The benches
applauded with excitement and settled themselves to hear a
denunciation <ex cathedra>. Father Butt excused himself amid cries of
"No, no" for detaining his audience at such an advanced hour but he
thought he should enter a word in favour of the much-abused essayist.
He would be <advocatus diaboli> and he felt the uncomfortableness of
his office all the more since one of the speakers had, not unjustly,
described the language in which Mr Daedalus' essay had been couched as
a language of angels. Mr Daedalus had contributed a very striking
paper, a paper which had filled the house and entertained them by the
lively discussion which it had provoked. Of course everyone could not
be of the same opinion in matters artistic. Mr Daedalus admitted the
conflict between romantics and classicals as the condition of all
achievement and they had certainly proof that night that a conflict
between antagonistic theories had been able to produce such distinct
achievements as the essay itself, a remarkable piece of work, on the
one hand and the memorable attack delivered by Mr Hughes, as leader of
the opposition, on the other hand. He thought that one or two of the
speakers had been unduly severe with the essayist but he was confident
that the essayist was well able to take care of himself in the matter
of argument. As for the theory itself Father Butt confessed that it
was a new sensation for him to hear Thomas Aquinas quoted as an
authority on esthetic philosophy. Esthetic philosophy was a modern
branch and if it was anything at all, it was practical. Aquinas had
treated slightly of the beautiful but always from a theoretic
standpoint. To interpret his statements practically one needed a
fuller knowledge than Mr Daedalus could have of his entire theology.
At the same time he would not go so far as to say that Mr Daedalus had
really, intentionally or unintentionally, misinterpreted Aquinas. But
just as an act which may be good in itself may become bad by reason of
circumstances so an object intrinsically beautiful may be vitiated by
other considerations. Mr Daedalus had chosen to consider beauty
intrinsically and to neglect these other considerations. But beauty
also has its practical side. Mr Daedalus was a passionate admirer of
the artistic and such people are not always the most practical people
in the [side] world. Father Butt then reminded his audience of the
story of King Alfred and the old woman who was cooking cakes -- of the
theorist, that is, and of the practical person and concluded by
expressing the hope that the essayist would emulate King Alfred and
not be too severe on the practical persons who had criticised him.
  The chairman in his summing-up speech complimented the essayist on
his style but he said the essayist had evidently forgotten that art
implies selection. He thought that the discussion on the paper had
been very instructive and he was sure they were all thankful to Father
Butt for his clear, concise criticism. Mr Daedalus had been somewhat
severely handled but he thought that, considering the many excellences
of his paper, he (the Chairman) was well justified in asking them to
agree unanimously that the best thanks of this society [are] were due
and [are] were hereby tendered to Mr Daedalus for his admirable and
instructive paper! The vote of thanks was passed unanimously but
without enthusiasm.
  Stephen stood up and bowed. It was customary for the essayist of the 
night to avail himself of this occasion for replying to his critics
but Stephen contented himself with acknowledging the vote of thanks.
Some called on him for a speech but, when the Chairman had waited in
vain for a few moments, the proceedings ran on rapidly to a close. In
five minutes the Physics' Theatre was empty. Downstairs in the hall
the young men were busy putting on their coats and lighting
cigarettes. Stephen looked for his father and Maurice but could see
them nowhere so he set out for home alone. At the corner of the Green
he came up with a group of four young men, Madden, Cranly, a young
medical student named Temple, and a clerk in the Custom-House. Madden
caught Stephen's arm and said consolingly in private:
  --Well, old man, I told you those fellows wouldn't understand it. I
knew it was too good for them.
  Stephen was touched by this show of friendship but he shook his head
as if he wished to change the subject. Besides, he knew that Madden
really understood very little of the paper and disapproved of what he
understood. When Stephen came up with the four young men they were
strolling very slowly, discussing a projected trip to Wicklow on
Easter Monday. Stephen walked beside Madden at the edge of the
footpath and thus the group advanced abreast along the wide footpath.
Cranly in the centre was linking Madden and the clerk from the
Custom-House. Stephen listened vaguely. Cranly was speaking (as was
his custom when he walked with other gentlemen of leisure) in a
language the base of which was Latin and the superstructure of which
was composed of Irish, French and German:
  --<Atque ad duas horas in Wicklowio venit>.
  --<Damnum longum tempus prendit>, said the clerk from the
Custom-House.
  --<Quando . . . no, I mean . . . quo in . . . bateau . irons-nous?>
asked Temple.
  --<Quo in batello?> said Cranly, in "<Regina Maris>."
  So after a little talk the young men agreed to take a trip to
Wicklow on the Sea-Queen. Stephen was much relieved to listen to this
conversation: in a few minutes the sting of his disaster was no longer
felt so acutely. Cranly at last observed Stephen walking at the edge
of the path and said:
  --<Ecce orator qui in malo humore est>.
  --<Non sum>, said Stephen.
  --<Credo ut estis>, said Cranly.
  --<Minime>.
  --<Credo ut vos sanguinarius mendax estis quia facies vestra mostrat
[<sic>] ut vos in malo humore estis>.
  Madden who could not talk this language well led the group back to
English. The clerk from the Custom-House seemed to have it on his
conscience to express admiration for Stephen's style. He was a big
stout young man with a lardy face and he carried an umbrella. He was
several years [younger] older than any of his companions but he had
decided to read for his degree in Mental and Moral Science. He was a
constant companion of Cranly's and it was the latter's eloquence which
had induced him to enter the night-classes in the College. Cranly
spent a great part of his time persuading young men to adopt different
lines of life. The clerk from the Custom-House was named O'Neill. He
was a very amiable person, always laughing asthmatically at Cranly's
serious fooling, but he was interested to hear of any occasion whereby
he might improve himself mentally. He attended the Debating Society
and the meetings of the College Sodality because he was thus brought
into 'touch' with University life. He was a circumspect young man but
he allowed Cranly to 'chaff' him about girls. Stephen tried to
dissuade the company from alluding to his essay but O'Neill had
accepted the occasion as one to be availed of. He asked Stephen
questions such as are to be found in the pages of young ladies'
confession-albums and Stephen thought that his mental heaven must
greatly resemble a confectioner's shop. Temple was a raw Gipsy-looking
youth with a shambling gait and a shambling manner of speaking. He was
from the West of Ireland and he was known to be very revolutionary.
When O'Neill had spoken for some time to Cranly, who had answered him
more politely than Stephen, Temple after a few false starts got in a
phrase:
  --I think . . . was a bloody fine paper.
  Cranly turned a vacant face in the direction of the speaker but
[O'Neill] Temple continued:
  --Made 'em sit up too.
  --<Habesne bibitum?> asked Cranly.
  --'Scuse me, sir, said [O'Neill] Temple to Stephen across the
intervening bodies, do you believe in Jesus . . . I don't believe in
Jesus, he added.
  Stephen laughed loudly at the tone of this statement and he
continued when Temple began to shamble through a kind of apology:
  --'Course I don't know . . . if you believe in Jesus. I believe in
Man . . . If you b'lieve in Jesus . . . of course . . . I oughtn't to
say anything the first time I met you . . . Do you think that?
  O'Neill preserved a solemn silence until Temple's speech had faded
into indistinct mutterings; then he said, as if he were beginning an
entirely new subject:
  --I was very much interested in your paper and in the speeches too .
. . What did you think of Hughes?
  Stephen did not answer.
  --Bloody cod, said Temple.
  --I thought his speech was in very bad taste, said O'Neill
sympathetically.
  --<Bellam boccam habet>, said Cranly.
  --Yes, I think he went too far, said Madden, but, you see, he gets
carried away by his enthusiasm.
  --<Patrioticus est>.
  --Yes, he is a patriotic 'cus, said O'Neill laughing wheezily. But I
thought Father Butt's speech very good, very clear and philosophical.
  --Did you think that? cried Temple from the inside of the path, to
Stephen . . . 'Scuse me . . . I wanted to know what he thought of
Butt's speech, he explained at the same time to the other [four] three
. . . Did you think . . . he was a bloody cod too?
  Stephen could not help laughing at this novel form of address though
Father Butt's speech had put him into anything but a charitable mood.
  --It was just the kind of thing he gives us every day, said Madden.
You know the style.
  --His speech annoyed me, said Stephen curtly.
  --Why was that? said Temple eagerly. Why was it he annoyed you?
  Stephen made a grimace instead of answering:
  --Bloody cod of a speech, said Temple . . . I'm a rationalist. I
don't b'lieve in any religion.
  --I think he meant part of his speech kindly, said Cranly slowly
after a pause, turning his face full towards Stephen. Stephen answered
his gaze, [and met] looking steadily into a pair of bright dark eyes,
and at the moment when their eyes met he felt hope. There was nothing
in the phrase to encourage; he doubted its justice very much: yet he
knew that hope had touched him. He walked on beside the four young
men, pondering. Cranly stopped before the window of a little
huckster's shop in one of the mean streets through which they passed,
staring fixedly at an old yellow copy of the <Daily Graphic> which was
hanging sideways on the glass. The illustration was a winter scene.
No-one said anything and as silence seemed about to set in permanently
Madden asked him what he was looking at. Cranly looked at his
questioner and then looked back again at the dirty picture, towards
which he nodded his head heavily:
  --What is . . . what is? asked Temple, who had been looking at some
cold crubeens in the next window.
  Cranly turned his vacant face again towards his questioner and
pointed to the picture, saying:
  --<Feuc an eis super stradam . . . in Liverpoolio>.
  Stephen's family circle was now increased by Isabel's return from
her convent. For some time she had been in delicate health and the
nuns had recommended that she should have home care. She came home a
few days after the famous day of Stephen's paper. Stephen was standing
at the little front window that looked towards the mouth of the river
when he saw his parents walking from the tram with a thin pale girl
walking between them. Stephen's father did not like the prospect of
another inhabitant in his house, particularly a daughter for whom he
had little affection. He was annoyed that his daughter would not avail
herself of the opportunity afforded her in the convent, but his sense
of public duty was real if spasmodic and he would by no means permit
his wife to bring the girl home without his aid. The reflection that
his daughter, instead of being a help to him would be a hindrance, and
the suspicion that the burden of responsibility which he had piously
imposed on his eldest son's shoulders was beginning to irk that young
man troubled his vision of the future. He had a taste for contrasts,
perhaps, which led him to expect industry and sobriety in his
offspring, [and] but it cannot be said that he desired any material
re-exaltation. It was just this impalpable excellence which he wished
his son to assert again in the teeth of circumstances which gained him
a conditional pardon at Stephen's hands. But this slight threat of
union between father and son had been worn away by the usages of daily
life and, by reason of its tenuity and of the [failure] gradual
rustiness which had begun to consume the upper station, it bore fewer
and feebler messages along it.
  Stephen's father was quite capable of talking himself into believing
what he knew to be untrue. He knew that his own ruin had been his own
handiwork but he had talked himself into believing that it was the
handiwork of others. He had his son's distaste for responsibility
without his son's courage. He was one of those illogical wiseacres
with whom no evidence can outreason the first impression. His wife had
fulfilled her duties to him with startling literalness and yet she had
never been able to expiate the offence of her blood. Misunderstanding
such as this, which is accepted as natural in higher social grades, is
wrongly refused recognition in the burgher class where it is often
found to issue in feuds of insatiable, narrow hatred. Mr Daedalus
hated his wife's maiden name with a medieval intensity: it stunk in
his nostrils. His alliance therewith was the only sin of which, in the
entire honesty of his cowardice, he could accuse himself. Now that he
was making for the final decades of life with the painful
consciousness of having diminished comfortable goods and of having
accumulated uncomfortable habits he consoled and revenged himself by
tirades so prolonged and so often repeated that he was in danger of
becoming a monomaniac. The hearth at night was the sacred witness of
these revenges, pondered, muttered, growled and execrated. The
exception which his clemency had originally made in favour of his wife
was soon out of mind and she began to irritate him by her dutiful
symbolism. The great disappointment of his life was accentuated by a
lesser and keener loss -- the loss of a coveted fame. On account of a
certain income and of certain sociable gifts Mr Daedalus had been
accustomed to regard himself as the centre of a little world, the
darling of a little society. This position he still strove to maintain
but at the cost of a reckless liberality from which his household had
to suffer both in deed and in spirit. He imagined that while he strove
to retain this infatuating position his home affairs would, through
the agency of a son whom he made no effort to understand, in some
divine manner right themselves. This hope when indulged in would
sometimes embitter his affection for a son whom he thereby
acknowledged as superior but, now that he was led to suspect that his
hope was fatuous, an embitterment of that affection seemed likely to
fix itself permanently among his emotional landmarks. His son's notion
of aristocracy was not the one which he could sympathise with and his
son's silence during the domestic battles no longer seemed to him a
conveyed compliment. He was, in fact, sufficiently acute to observe
here a covert menace against castellar rights and he would not have
been wrong if he had imagined that his son regarded [these] assistance
at these tortuous and obscene monologues as the tribute exacted by a
father for affording a wayward child a base of supplies . . .
  Stephen did not consider his parents very seriously. In his opinion
they had opened up misleading and unnatural relations between
themselves and him and he considered their affection for him requited
by a studious demeanour towards them and by a genuine goodwill to
perform for them a great number of such material services as, in his
present state of fierce idealism, he could look upon as trifles. The
only material services he would refuse them were those which he judged
to be spiritually dangerous and it is as well to admit that this
exception all but nullified his charity for he had cultivated an
independence of the soul which could brook very few subjections.
Divine exemplars abetted him in this. The phrase which preachers
elaborate into a commandment of obedience seemed to him meagre,
ironical and inconclusive and the narrative of the life of Jesus did
not in any way impress him [with] as the narrative of the life of one
who was subject to others. When he had been a Roman Catholic in the
proper sense of the term the figure of Jesus had always seemed to him
too remote and too passionless and he had never uttered from his heart
a single fervent prayer to the Redeemer: it was to Mary, as to a
weaker and more engaging vessel of salvation, that he had entrusted
his spiritual affairs. Now his enfranchisement from the discipline of
the Church seemed to be coincident with an [natural] instinctive
return to the Founder thereof and this impulse would have led him
perhaps to a consideration of the merits of Protestantism had not
another natural impulse inclined him to bring even the
self-contradictory and the absurd into order. He did not know,
besides, whether the haughtiness of the Papacy was not as derivable
from Jesus himself as the reluctance to be pressed beyond "Amen: I say
to you" for an account of anything but he was quite sure that behind
the enigmatic utterances of Jesus there was a very much more definite
conception than any which could be supposed [to] discoverable behind
Protestant theology:
  --Put this in your diary, he said to transcriptive Maurice.
Protestant Orthodoxy is like Lanty McHale's dog: it goes a bit of the
road with everyone.
  --It seems to me that S. Paul trained that dog, said Maurice.
  One day when Stephen had gone to the College by accident he found
McCann standing in the hall holding a long testimonial. Another part
of the testimonial was on the hall-table and nearly all the young men
in the College were signing their names to it. McCann was speaking
volubly to a little group and Stephen discovered that the testimonial
was the tribute of Dublin University students to the Tsar of Russia.
World-wide peace: solution of all disputes by arbitration: general
disarming of the nations: these were the benefits for which the
students were returning their thanks. On the hall table there were two
photographs, one of the Tsar of Russia, the other of the Editor of the
<Review of Reviews>: both of the photographs were signed by the famous
couple. As McCann was standing sideways to the light Stephen amused
himself in tracing a resemblance between him and the pacific Emperor
whose photograph had been taken in profile. The Tsar's air of besotted
Christ moved him to scorn and he turned for support to Cranly who was
standing beside the door. Cranly wore a very dirty yellow straw hat of
the shape of an inverted bucket in the shelter of which his face was
composed to a glaucuous [<sic>] calm.
  --Doesn't he look a wirrasthrue Jaysus? said Stephen pointing to the
Tsar's photograph and using the Dublin version of the name as an
effective common noun.
  Cranly looked in the direction of McCann and replied, nodding his
head:
  --Wirrasthrue Jaysus and hairy Jaysus.
  At that moment McCann caught sight of Stephen and signalled that he
would be with him in a moment:
  --Have you signed? asked Cranly.
  --This thing? No -- have you?
  Cranly hesitated and then brought out a well deliberated 'Yes.'
  --What for?
  --What for?
  --Ay.
  --For . . . <Pax>.
  Stephen looked up under the bucket-shaped hat but could read no
expression on his neighbour's face. His eyes wandered up to the dinged
vertex of the hat.
  --In the name of God what do you wear that hat for? It's not so
terribly hot, is it? he asked.
  Cranly took off the hat slowly and gazed into its depths. After a
little pause he pointed into it and said:
  --<Viginti-uno denarios>.
  --Where? said Stephen.
  --I bought it, said Cranly very impressively and very flatly, last
summer in Wickla.
  He looked back into the hat and said, smiling with a sour affection:
  --It's not . . . too bloody bad . . . of a hat . D'ye know.
  And he replaced it on his head slowly, murmuring to himself, from
force of habit '<Viginti-uno denarios>.'
  --<Sicut bucketus est>, said Stephen.
  The subject was not discussed further. Cranly produced a little grey
ball from one of his pockets and began to examine it carefully,
indenting the surface at many points. Stephen was watching this
operation when he heard McCann addressing him.
  --I want you to sign this testimonial.
  --What about?
  --It's a testimonial of admiration for the courage displayed by the
Tsar of Russia in issuing a rescript to the Powers, advocating
arbitration instead of war as a means of settling national disputes.
  Stephen shook his head. Temple who had been wandering round the hall
in search of sympathy came over at this moment and said to Stephen:
  --Do you believe in peace?
  No-one answered him.
  --So you won't sign? said McCann.
  Stephen shook his head again:
  --Why not? said McCann sharply.
  --If we must have a Jesus, answered Stephen, let us have a
legitimate Jesus.
  --By hell! said Temple laughing, that's good. Did you hear that? he
said to Cranly and McCann both of whom he seemed to regard as very
hard of hearing. D'you hear that? Legitima' Jesus!
  --I presume then you approve of war and slaughter, said McCann.
  --I did not make the world, said Stephen.
  --By hell! said Temple to Cranly. I believe in universal
brotherhood. 'Scuse me, he said, turning to McCann, do you believe in
universal brotherhood?
  McCann took no heed of the question but continued addressing
Stephen. He began an argument in favour of peace which Temple listened
to for a few moments, but, as he spoke with his back to Temple, that
revolutionary young man who could not hear him very well began to
wander round the hall again. Stephen did not argue with McCann but at
a convenient pause he said:
  --I have no intention of signing.
  McCann halted and Cranly said, taking Stephen's arm:
  --<Nos ad manum ballum jocabimus>.
  --All right, said McCann promptly, as if he was accustomed to
rebuffs, if you won't, you won't.
  He went off to get more signatures for the Tsar while Cranly and
Stephen went out into the garden. The ball-alley was deserted so they
arranged a match of twenty, Cranly allowing Stephen seven points.
Stephen had not had much practice at the game and so he was only
seventeen when Cranly cried out 'Game Ball.' He lost the second game
also. Cranly was a strong, accurate player but Stephen thought too
heavy of foot to be a brilliant one. While they were playing Madden
came into the alley and sat down on an old box. He was much more
excited than either of the players and kept kicking the box with his
heels and crying out "Now, Cranly! Now, Cranly!" "But it, Stevie!"
Cranly who had to serve the third game put the ball over the side of
the alley into Lord Iveagh's grounds and the game had to wait while he
went in search of it. Stephen sat down on his heels beside Madden and
they both looked up at the figure of Cranly who was holding on to the
netting and making signals to one of the gardeners from the top of the
wall. Madden took out smoking materials:
  --Are you and Cranly long here?
  --Not long, said Stephen.
  Madden began to stuff very coarse tobacco into his pipe:
  --D'ye know what, Stevie?
  --What?
  --Hughes . . . doesn't like you . . . at all. I heard him speaking
of you to someone.
  --'Someone' is vague.
  --He doesn't like you at all.
  --His enthusiasm carries him away, said Stephen.
  On the evening of the Saturday before Palm Sunday Stephen found
himself alone with Cranly. The two were leaning over the marble
staircase of the Library, idly watching the people coming in and going
out. The big windows in front of them were thrown and the mild air
[entered] came through: [them]
  --Do you like the services of Holy Week? said Stephen.
  --Yes, said Cranly.
  --They are wonderful, said Stephen. Tenebrae -- it's so damned
childish to frighten us by knocking prayerbooks on a bench. Isn't it
strange to see the Mass of the Presanctified -- no lights or
vestments, the altar naked, the door of the tabernacle gaping open,
the priests lying prostrate on the altar steps?
  --Yes, said Cranly.
  --Don't you think the Reader who begins the mass is a strange
person. No-one knows where he comes from: he has no connection with
the mass. He comes out by himself and opens a book at the right hand
side of the altar and when he has read the lesson he closes the book
and goes away as he came. Isn't he strange?
  --Yes, said Cranly.
  --You know how his lesson begins? <Dixit enim Dominus: in
tribulatione sua consurgent ad me; venite et revertamur ad Dominum>.
  He chanted the opening of the lesson in <mezza voce> and his voice
went flowing down the staircase and round the circular hall, each tone
coming back upon the ear enriched and softened.
  --He pleads, said Stephen. He is what that chalk-faced chap was for
me, <advocatus diaboli>. Jesus has no friend on Good Friday. Do you
know what kind of a figure rises before me on Good Friday?
  --What kind?
  --An ugly little man who has taken into his body the sins of the
world. Something between Socrates and a Gnostic Christ -- A Christ of
the Dark Ages. That's what his mission of redemption has got for him:
a crooked ugly body for which neither God nor man have pity. Jesus is
on strange terms with that father of his. His father seems to me
something of a snob. Do you notice that he never notices his son
publicly but once -- when Jesus is in full dress on the top of Thabor?
  --I don't like Holy Thursday much, said Cranly.
  --Neither do I. There are too many mammas and daughters going
chapel-hunting. The chapel smells too much of flowers and hot candles
and women. Besides girls praying put me off my stroke.
  --Do you like Holy Saturday?
  --The service is always too early but I like it.
  --I like it.
  --Yes, the Church seems to have thought the matter over and to be
saying "Well, after all, you see, it's morning now and he wasn't so
dead as we thought he was." The corpse has become a paschal candle
with five grains of incense stuck in it instead of its five wounds.
The three faithful Mary's too who thought all was over on Friday have
a candle each. The bells ring and the service is full of irrelevant
alleluias.t It's rather a technical affair, blessing this, that and
the other but it's cheerfully ceremonious.
  --But you don't imagine the damned fools of people see anything in
these services, do you?
  --Do they not? said Stephen.
  --Bah, said Cranly.
  One of Cranly's friends came up the stairs while they were talking.
He was a young man who was by day a clerk in Guinness's Brewery and by
night a student of mental and moral philosophy in the night classes of
the College. It was, of course, Cranly who had induced him to attend.
This young man, who was named Glynn, was unable to keep his head
steady as he suffered from inherited nervousness and his hands
trembled very much whenever he tried to do anything with them. He
spoke with nervous hesitations and seemed to obtain satisfaction only
in the methodic stamp of his feet. He was a low-sized young man, with
a nigger's face and the curly black head of a nigger. He usually
carried an umbrella and his conversation was for the most part a
translation of commonplaces into polysyllabic phrases. This habit he
cultivated partly because it saved him from the inconvenience of
cerebrating at the normal rate and perhaps because he considered it
was the channel best fitted for his peculiar humour.
  --Here is Professor Bloody-Big-Umbrella Glynn, said Cranly.
  --Good evening, Gentlemen, said Glynn, bowing.
  --Good . . . evening, said Cranly vacantly. Well, yes . . . it is a
good evening.
  --I can see, said Glynn shaking a trembling forefinger in reproof, I
can see that you are about to make obvious remarks.
  On Spy Wednesday night Cranly and Stephen attended the office of
Tenebrae in the Pro-Cathedral. They went round to the back of the
altar and knelt behind the students from Clonliffe who were chanting
the office. Stephen was right opposite Wells and he observed the great
change which a surplice made in that young man's appearance. Stephen
did not like the office which was gabbled over quickly. He said to
Cranly that the chapel with its polished benches and incandescent
lamps reminded him of an insurance office. Cranly arranged that on
Good Friday they should attend the office in the Carmelite Church,
Whitefriar's St where, he said, the office was much more homely.
Cranly accompanied Stephen part of the way home and explained very
minutely, using his large hands for the purpose, all the merits of
Wicklow bacon.
  --You are no Israelite, said Stephen, I see you eat the unclean
animal.
  Cranly replied that it was nonsense to consider the pig unclean
because he ate dirty garbage and at the same time to consider the
oyster, which fed chiefly on excrements, a delicacy. He believed that
the pig was much maligned: he said there was a lot of money to be made
out of pigs. He instanced all the Germans who made small fortunes in
Dublin by opening porkshops.
  --I often thought seriously, he said stopping in his walk to give
emphasis to his remark, of opening a pork-shop, d'ye know . . . and
putting <Kranliberg> or some German name, d'ye know, over the door . .
. and makin' a flamin' fortune out of pig's meat.
  --God bless us! said Stephen. What a terrible idea!
  --Ay, said Cranly walking on heavily, a flamin' bloody fortune I'd
make.
  On Good Friday as Stephen was wandering aimlessly about the city he
caught sight of a placard on a wall which announced that the Three
Hours' Agony would be preached by the Very Reverend W. Dillon S.J. and
the Very Reverend J. Campbell S.J. in the Jesuit Church, Gardiner St.
Stephen felt very solitary and purposeless as he traversed empty
street after empty street and, without being keenly aware of it, he
began to proceed in the direction of Gardiner St. It was a warm
sunless day and the city wore an air of sacred torpor. As he passed
under S. George's Church he saw that it was already half past two; --
he had been three hours wandering up and down the city. He entered the
Church in Gardiner St and, passing by without honouring the table of
the lay-brother who roused himself from a stupefied doze in
expectation of silver, arrived in the right wing of the chapel. The
chapel was crowded from altar to doors with a well-dressed multitude.
Everywhere he saw the same flattered affection for the Jesuits who are
in the habit of attaching to their order the souls of thousands of the
insecurely respectable middle-class by offering them a refined asylum,
an interested, a considerate confessional, a particular amiableness of
manners which their spiritual adventures in no way entitled them to.
Not very far from him in the shelter of one of the pillars Stephen saw
his father and two friends. His father had directed his eyeglass upon
the distant choir and his face wore an expression of impressed piety.
The choir was executing some florid tracery which was intended as an
expression of mourning. The walk, the heat, the crush, the darkness of
the chapel overcame Stephen and, leaning against the lintel of the
door, he half closed his eyes and allowed his thoughts to drift.
Rhymes began to make themselves in his head.
  He perceived dimly that a white figure had ascended the pulpit and
he heard a voice saying <Consummatum est>. He recognised the voice and
he knew that Father Dillon was preaching on the Seventh Word. He took
no trouble to hear the sermon but every few minutes he heard a new
translation of the Word rolling over the congregation. "It is ended"
"It is accomplished." This sensation awoke him from his day-dream and
as the translations followed [each] one another more and more rapidly
he found his gambling instinct on the alert. He wagered with himself
as to what word the preacher would select. "It is . . . accomplished"
"It is . . . consummated" "It is . . . achieved." In the few seconds
which intervened between the first part and the second part of the
phrase Stephen's mind performed feats of divining agility "It is . . .
finished" "It is . . . completed" "It is . . . concluded." At last
with a final burst of rhetoric Father Dillon cried out that it was
over and the congregation began to pour itself out into the streets.
Stephen was borne along in the crowd and everywhere about him he heard
the same murmurs of admiration and saw the same expressions of
satisfaction, discreet murmurs, subdued expressions. The special
charges of the Jesuits were congratulating themselves and one another
on a well-spent Good Friday.
  To avoid his father Stephen slipped round towards the body of the
chapel and waited in the central porch while the common people came
shuffling and stumbling past him. Here also there was admiration,
satisfaction. A young workman passed out with his wife and Stephen
heard the words "He knows his thayology, I tell ye." Two women stopped
beside the holy water font and after scraping their hands a vainly
over the bottom crossed themselves in a slovenly fashion with their
dry hands. One of them sighed and drew her brown shawl about her:
  --An' his language, said the other woman.
  --Aw yis.
  Here the other woman sighed in her turn and drew her shawl about
her:
  --On'y, said she, God bless the gintleman, he uses the words that
you nor me can't intarpit.


                               XXI


  Between Easter and the end of May Stephen's acquaintance with Cranly
progressed night by night. As the time of the Summer Examinations was
approaching Maurice and Stephen were both supposed to be hard at work.
Maurice retired to his room carefully every evening after tea-time and
Stephen repaired to the Library where he was supposed to be engaged in
serious work. As a matter of fact he read little or nothing in the
Library. He talked with Cranly by the hour either at a table, or, if
removed by the librarian or by the indignant glances of students,
standing at the top of the staircase. At ten o'clock when the library
closed the two returned together through the central streets
exchanging banalities with the other students.
  It would seem at first somewhat strange and improbable that these
two young men should have anything in common beyond an incurable
desire for leisure. Stephen had begun to regard himself seriously as a
literary artist: he professed scorn for the rabblement and contempt
for authority. Cranly's chosen companions represented the rabblement
in a stage of partial fermentation when it is midway between vat and
flagon and Cranly seemed to please himself in the spectacle of this
caricature of his own unreadiness. Anyhow towards rabblement and
authority alike he behaved with submissive deference and Stephen would
have been disposed to regard this too mature demeanour as a real sign
of interior corruption had he not daily evidence that Cranly was
willing to endanger his own fair name as a member of the Sodality and
as a general lay-servant of the Church by association with one who was
known to be contaminated. Cranly, however, might have wished the
fathers to suppose that he went with the rebellious young artist with
the secret purpose of leading him back again to good ways and, as if
from a secret appreciation of his own fitness for such a task, he
always enlarged and interpreted the doctrines of the Church side by
side with Stephen's theories. Thus confronted, it was a trick of the
pleader for orthodoxy to suggest a possible reconciliation between
neighbours and to suggest [even] further that the Church would not be
over hasty in condemning vagaries of architecture or even the use of
pagan emblems and flourishes so long as her ground rent was paid
quarterly in advance. These accommodating business terms, which would
have seemed of suspicious piety to more simple souls, were not likely
to startle two young men who were fond of tracing even moral phenomena
back to the region of their primal cells. The moral doctrine of
Catholicism [with] so cunningly lined and interwoven with a studious
alloy of conscience was capable under the management of a nimble
spirit of performing feats of extension and contraction. After a
thousand such changes of form this elastic body was suddenly detected
in a change of position and a point hitherto external was now seen to
be well enclosed within it: and all this imperceptibly, while the eye
was lulled by the mere exhibition of so many variations executed with
a certain amoeboid instinct.
  As for artistic sympathies Cranly could hardly be said to offer
these. He had all the rustic's affection for the prosaic things of the
six days of the week and, in addition to this, he lacked the
hypocritical taste which the rustic affects for the fine arts on the
seventh day. In the Library he read.nothing but the weekly illustrated
papers. Sometimes he took a big book from the counter and carried it
solemnly to his place where he opened it and studied the title-page
and preface for an hour or so. Of fine literature he had, almost
literally speaking, no knowledge. His acquaintance with English prose
seemed to be limited to a hazy acquaintance with the beginning of
<Nicholas Nickleby> and of English verse he had certainly read
Wordsworth's poem which is called "<Advice to a Father>." Both of
these accomplishments he divulged to Stephen one day when he had been
discovered reading with great attention the title-page of a book which
was called <Diseases of the Ox>. He offered no comment on what he had
read and simply stated the achievement not without wonder at his
having achieved it. He had a straggling regiment of words at his
command and he was thus enabled to express himself: but he spoke
flatly and frequently made childish errors. He had a defiant manner of
using technical and foreign terms as if he wished to suggest that for
him they were mere conventions of language. His receptiveness was not
troubled by any nausea; he received everything that came in his way
and it was purely instinctive of Stephen to perceive any special
affinity in so indiscriminate a vessel. He was fond of leading a
philosophical argument back to the machinery of the intellectual
faculty itself and in mundane matters he did likewise, testing
everything by its food value.
  It was in favour of this young man that Stephen decided to break his
commandment of reticence. Cranly, on his side, must have been above
all the accidents of life if he had not suffered a slight commotion
from such delicately insistent flattery. Stephen spoke to his
impoverished ear out of the plenitude of an amassed vocabulary, and
confronted the daring commonplaces of his companion's moods with a
complex radiance of thought. Cranly seldom or never obtruded his
presence upon these monologues. He listened to all, seemed to
understand all, and seemed to think it was the duty of his
suppositious character to listen [to] and understand. He never refused
his ear. Stephen claimed it in and out of season as he felt the need
for intelligent sympathy. They promenaded miles of the streets
together, arm-in-arm. They halted in wet weather under spacious
porches, desisting at the sight of some inviting triviality. They sat
sometimes in the pit of a music-hall and one unfolded to the other the
tapestry of his poetical aims while the band bawled to the comedian
and the comedian bawled to the band. Cranly grew used to having
sensations and impressions recorded and analysed before him at the
very instant of their apparition. Such concentration upon oneself was
unknown to [Cranly] him and he wondered at first with the joy of
solitary possession at Stephen's ingenuous arrogance. This phenomenon,
which called all his previous judgments to account, and opened out a
new system of life at the last limit of [Cranly's] his world, rankled
somewhat in [Cranly's] his mind. It irritated him also because he knew
too well the large percentage of Christian sentiment which concealed
itself under [a] his veneer of Stoicism to suspect himself of any
talent for a similar extravagance. And yet, hearing the whole-hearted
young egoist pour out his pride and anger at his feet like some costly
ointment, and benefiting by a liberality which seemed to keep nothing
in reserve, much as he would have liked to hold himself aloof from
such ties he felt himself gradually answering the appeal by a silent,
perverse affection. He affected more brutality than was in his nature
and, as if infected by his companion's arrogance, seemed to expect
that the practice of aggressive criticism would be suspended in his
case.
  A licence which he allowed himself rather freely was that of
impolite abstraction, so deep as to suggest great mental activity but
issuing at last in some blunt actuality. If a [conversation] monologue
which had set out from a triviality seemed to him likely to run on
unduly he would receive it with a silence through which aversion was
just discernible and at a lull bring his hammer down brutally on the
poor original object. At times Stephen found this ultra-classical
habit very unpalatable. One evening the monologue was interrupted time
after time. Stephen had mentioned his sister's illness and had spread
out a few leagues of theory on the subject of the tyranny of home.
Cranly never actually broke in upon the oration but he continued
inserting question after question whenever he had an opening. He asked
Isabel's age, her symptoms, her doctor's name, her treatment, her
diet, her appearance, how her mother nursed her, whether they had sent
for a priest or not, whether she had ever been sick before or not.
Stephen answered all these questions and still Cranly was not
satisfied. He continued his questions until the monologue had in all
decency to be abandoned: and Stephen, thinking over his manner, was
unable to decide whether such conduct was to be considered the sign of
a deep interest in a human illness or the sign of irritated
dissatisfaction with an inhuman theorist.
  Stephen did not in the least shrink from applying the reproach to
himself but he found himself honestly unable to admit its justice. His
sister had become almost a stranger to him on account of the way in
which she had been brought up. He had hardly spoken a hundred words to
her since the time when they had been children together. He could not
speak to her now except as to a stranger. She had acquiesced in the
religion of her mother; she had accepted everything that had been
proposed to her. If she lived she had exactly the temper for a
Catholic wife of limited intelligence and of pious docility and if she
died she was supposed to have earned for herself a place in the
eternal heaven of Christians from which her two brothers were likely
to be shut out. Calamities in this world are reported to sit lightly
on the shoulders of the true Christian who can bide his time until the
Creator institutes the kingdom of the good. Isabel's case moved
Stephen's anger and commiseration but he saw at once how hopeless it
was and how vain it would be for him to interfere. Her life had been
and would always be a trembling walk before God. The slightest
interchange of ideas between them must be either a condescension on
his part or an attempt to corrupt. No consciousness of their nearness
in blood troubled him with natural, unreasoning affection. She was
called his sister as his mother was called his mother but there had
never been any proof of that relation offered him in their emotional
attitude towards him, or any recognition of it permitted in his
emotional attitude towards them. The Catholic husband and wife, the
Catholic father and mother, are allowed to be natural at discretion
but the same grace is not vouchsafed to Catholic children. They must
preserve an unquestioning orderliness even at the risk of being
upbraided as unnatural by the very preachers who assert that nature is
the possession of Satan. Stephen had felt impulses of pity for his
mother, for his father, for Isabel, for Wells also but he believed
that he had done right in resisting them: he had first of all to save
himself and he had no business trying to save others unless his
experiment with himself justified him. Cranly had all but formulated
serious charges against him, calling up by implication the picture of
Isabel with her gradually wasting flame, her long dark hair and great
wondering eyes, but Stephen stood up to the charges and answered in
his heart that it was injustice to point a finger of reproach at him
and that a vague inactive pity from those who upheld a system of
mutual servile association towards those who accepted it was only a
play upon emotions as characteristic of the egoist as of the man of
sentiment. Isabel, moreover, did not seem to Stephen to be in any
great danger. He told Cranly she was probably growing too fast; many
girls were delicate at that age. He confessed that the subject tired
him a little. Cranly stood still and looked at him fixedly:
  --My dear man, said he, d'ye know what it is . . . You're an
extraordinary . . . man.
  A week before the examination Cranly explained to Stephen his plan
for reading the course in five days. It was a carefully made plan,
founded upon an intimate knowledge of examiners and examination
papers. Cranly's plan was to study from ten in the morning until half
past two in the afternoon, then from four to six, and then from half
past seven to ten. Stephen declined to follow this plan as he imagined
he had a fair chance of passing on what he called 'roundabout'
knowledge but Cranly said that the plan was perfectly safe.
  --I don't quite see that, said Stephen, how can you manage to pass
-- in Latin composition, say -- after such a cursory run over it? If
you like I'll show you some things -- not that I can write so
marvellously . . .
  Cranly meditated without seeming to observe the offer. Then he
averred flatly that his plan would work:
  --I'll take my dyin' bible, he said, I'll write them as good a
thing, d'ye know, ay -- as good a thing as they want. What do they
know about Latin prose?
  --Not much, I suppose, said Stephen, but they may not be quite
ignorant of Latin grammar.
  Cranly thought this over and then found his remedy:
  --D'ye know what, he said, whenever I can't think of the grammar
I'll bring in a piece out of Tacitus.
  --Apropos of what?
  --What the flamin' hell does it matter what it's apropos of?
  --Quite right, said Stephen.
  Cranly's plan neither succeeded nor failed for the very good reason
that it was never followed. The nights before the examination were
spent sitting outside under the porch of the Library. The two young
men gazed up into the tranquil sky and discussed how it was possible
to live with the least amount of labour. Cranly suggested bees: he
seemed to know the entire economy of bee-life and he did not seem as
intolerant towards bees as towards men. Stephen said it would be a
good arrangement if Cranly were to live on the labour of the bees and
allow him (Stephen) to live on the united labours of the bees and of
their keeper.
  --"I will watch from dawn to gloom
     The lake-reflected sun illume
     The yellow bees in the ivy bloom.''
  --"Illume"? said Cranly.
  --You know the meaning of "illume"?
  --Who wrote that?
  --Shelley.
  --Illume -- it's just the word, d'ye know, for autumn, deep gold
colour.
  --A spiritual interpretation of landscape is very rare. Some people
think they write spiritually if they make their scenery dim and
cloudy.
  --That bit you said now doesn't seem to me spiritual.
  --Nor to me: but sometimes Shelley does not address the eye. He says
"many a lake-surrounded flute." Does that strike your eye or your
sense of colour?
  --Shelley has a face that reminds me of a bird. What is it? "The
lake-surrounded sun illume"? . . .
  --"The lake-reflected sun illume
     The yellow bees in the ivy bloom."
  --What are you quoting? asked Glynn who had just come out of the
Library after several hours of study.
  Cranly surveyed him before answering:
  --Shelley.
  --O, Shelley? What was the quotation again?
  Cranly nodded towards Stephen.
  --What was the quotation? asked Glynn. Shelley is an old flame of
mine.
  Stephen repeated the lines and Glynn nodded his head nervously
several times in approval.
  --Beautiful poetry Shelley wrote, didn't he? So mystical.
  --D'ye know what they call them yellow bees in Wickla? asked Cranly
suddenly, turning to Glynn.
  --No? what?
  --Red-arsed bees.
  Cranly laughed loudly at his own remark and struck his heels on the
granite steps. Glynn, conscious of a false position, began to fumble
with his umbrella and to search for one of his stock witticisms.
  --But that is only, he said, if you will pardon the expression, that
is only so to speak . . .
  --"The lake-surrounded sun illume
     The red-arsed bees in the ivy bloom."
  --It's every bit as good bloody poetry as Shelley's, said Cranly to
Glynn. What do you think?
  --It seems to me undeniable, said Glynn driving his unsteady
umbrella before him as an emphasis, that the bees are in the bloom. Of
that we may say that it is distinctly so.
  The examination lasted five days. After the first two days Cranly
did not even go through the form of entering the examination hall but
after each paper he was to be seen outside the University going over
all the questions carefully with his more diligent friends. He said
that the papers were very easy and that anyone could pass them on a
fair knowledge. He did not ask Stephen any particular questions but
said merely "I suppose you're through." "I expect so" said Stephen.
McCann usually came to meet the students who had been under
examination. He came partly because he considered it was part of his
duty to show an interest in all that concerned the College, and partly
because one of Mr Daniel's daughters was under examination. Stephen
who did not care very much whether he succeeded or failed in the
examination was very much amused observing the jealousies and nervous
anxieties which tried to conceal themselves under airs of
carelessness. Students who had studied hard all the year pretended to
be in the same case as idlers and idle and diligent both appeared to
submit to the examination with great unwillingness. Those who were
rivals did not speak to each other, being afraid to trust their eyes,
but one questioned wandering acquaintances privily about the other's
success. Their excitement was so genuine that even the excitement of
sex failed to overcome it. The girl students were not the subject of
the usual sniggers and jokes but were regarded with some aversion as
sly enemies. Some of the young men eased their enmity and vindicated
their superiority at the same time by saying that it was no wonder the
women would do well seeing that they could study ten hours [all] a day
all the year round. McCann, who acted as go-between, told them the
gossip from the other camp and it was he who [had] spread the report
that Landy would not get first class honours in English because Miss
Reeves had written an essay of twenty pages on <The Use and Abuse of
Ridicule>.
  The examination ended on Tuesday. On Wednesday morning Stephen's
mother seemed to be rather anxious. Stephen had not given his parents
much satisfaction as to his conduct at the examination but he could
not think that this was the cause of his mother's trouble: he waited,
however, for the trouble to declare itself. His mother waited till the
room was clear and then she said casually:
  --You have not made your Easter duty yet, have you, Stephen?
  Stephen answered that he had not.
  --It would be better for you to go to confession in the daytime.
Tomorrow is Ascension Thursday and the chapels are sure to be crowded
tonight by people who have left off making their Easter duty till the
last moment. It's a wonder people wouldn't have more shame in them.
Goodness knows they have time enough from Ash Wednesday, without
waiting till the stroke of twelve to go to the priest . . . I'm not
speaking of you, Stephen. I know you have been studying for your
examination. But people who have nothing to do . . .
  Stephen made no answer to this but went on scraping diligently in
his eggshell.
  --I have made my Easter duty already -- on Holy Thursday -- but I'm
going to the altar in the morning. I am making a novena and I want you
to offer up your communion for a special intention of mine.
  --What special intention?
  --Well, dear, I'm very much concerned about Isabel . . . I don't
know what to think . . .
  Stephen stuck his spoon angrily through the bottom of the shell and
asked was there any more tea.
  --There's no more in the pot but I can boil some water in a minute.
  --O, never mind.
  --It won't be a jiffy.
  Stephen allowed the water to be put on as it would [allow] give him
time to put an end to the conversation. He was much annoyed that his
mother should try to wheedle him into conformity by using his sister's
health as an argument. He felt that such an attempt dishonoured him
and freed him from the last dissuasions of considerate piety. His
mother put on the water and appeared to be less anxious as if she had
expected a blunt refusal. She even ventured on the small talk of
religious matrons.
  --I must try and get in to town tomorrow in time for High Mass in
Marlborough St. Tomorrow is a great feast-day in the Church.
  --Why? asked Stephen smiling.
  --The Ascension of Our Lord, answered his mother gravely.
  --And why is that a great feast-day?
  --Because it was on that day he showed Himself Divine: he ascended
into Heaven.
  Stephen began to plaster butter over a crusty heel of the loaf while
his features settled into definite hostility:
  --Where did he go off?
  --From Mount Olivet, answered his mother reddening under her eyes.
  --Head first?
  --What do you mean, Stephen?
  --I mean he must have been rather giddy by the time he arrived. Why
didn't he go by balloon?
  --Stephen, are you trying to scoff at Our Lord? I really thought you
had more intelligence than to use that kind of language: it's only
what people who believe only in what they can see under their noses
say. I'm surprised.
  --Tell me, mother, said Stephen between mouthfuls, do you mean to
tell me you believe that our friend went up off the mountain as they
say he did?
  --I do.
  --I don't.
  --What are you saying, Stephen?
  --It's absurd: it's Barnum. He comes into the world God knows how,
walks on the water, gets out of his grave and goes up off the Hill of
Howth. What drivel is this?
  --Stephen!
  --I don't believe it: and it would be no credit if I did. It's no
credit to me that I don't. It's drivel.
  --The most learned doctors of the Church believe it and that's good
enough for me.
  --He can fast for forty days .
  --God can do all things.
  --There's a fellow in Capel St at present in a show who says he can
eat glass and hard nails. He calls himself <The Human Ostrich>.
  --Stephen, said his mother, I'm afraid you have lost your faith.
  --I'm afraid so too, said Stephen.
  Mrs Daedalus looked very discomposed and sat down helplessly on the
nearest chair. Stephen fixed his attention on the water and when it
was ready made himself another cup of tea.
  --I little thought, said his mother, that it would come to this --
that a child of mine would lose the faith.
  --But you knew some time ago.
  --How could I know?
  --You knew.
  --I suspected something was wrong but I never thought
  --And yet you wanted me to receive Holy Communion!
  --Of course you cannot receive it now. But I thought you would make
your Easter duty as you have done every year up till now. I do not
know what led you astray unless it was those books you read. John,
too, your uncle -- he was led astray by books when he was young but --
only for a time.
  --Poor fellow! said Stephen.
  --You were religiously brought up by the Jesuits, in a Catholic home
. . .
  --A very Catholic home!
  --None of your people, neither your father's nor mine, have a drop
of anything but Catholic blood in their veins.
  --Well, I'll make a beginning in the family.
  --This is the result of being left too much liberty. You do as you
like and believe what you like.
  --I don't believe, for example, that Jesus was the only man that
ever had pure auburn hair.
  --Well?
  --Nor that he was the only man that was exactly six feet high,
neither more nor less.
  --Well?
  --Well, you believe that. I heard you tell that years ago to our
nurse in Bray -- do you remember nurse Sarah?
  Mrs Daedalus defended the tradition in a half-hearted way.
  --That is what they say.
  --O, they say! They say a great deal.
  --But you need not believe that if you don't want to.
  --Thanks very much.
  --All you are asked to believe in is the word of God. Think of the
beautiful teachings of Our Lord. Think of your own life when you
believed in those teachings. Weren't you better and happier then?
  --It was good for me at the time, perhaps, but it is quite useless
for me now.
  --I know what is wrong with you -- you suffer from the pride of the
intellect. You forget that we are only worms of the earth. You think
you can defy God because you have misused the talents he has given
you.
  --I think Jehovah gets too high a salary for judging motives. I want
to retire him on the plea of old age.
  Mrs Daedalus stood up.
  --Stephen, you may use that kind of language with your companions
whoever they are but I will not allow you to use it with me. Even your
father, bad as he is supposed to be, does not speak such blasphemy as
you do. I am afraid that you are a changed boy since you went to that
University. I suppose you fell in with some of those students . . .
  --Good Lord, mother, said Stephen, don't believe that. The students
are awfully nice fellows. They love their religion: they wouldn't say
boo to a goose.
  --Wherever you've learnt it I will not allow you to use such
language to me when you speak of holy things. Keep that for the
street-corners at night.
  --Very well, mother, said Stephen. But you began the conversation.
  --I never thought I would see the day when a child of mine would
lose the faith. God knows I didn't. I did my best for you to keep you
in the right way.
  Mrs Daedalus began to cry. Stephen, having eaten and drunk all
within his province, rose and went towards the door:
  --It's all the fault of those books and the company you keep. Out at
all hours of the night instead of in your home, the proper place for
you. I'll burn every one of them. I won't have them in the house to
corrupt anyone else.
  Stephen halted at the door and turned towards his mother who had now
broken out into tears:
  --If you were a genuine Roman Catholic, mother, you would burn me as
well as the books.
  --I knew no good would come of your going to that place. You are
ruining yourself body and soul. Now your faith is gone!
  --Mother, said Stephen from the threshold, I don't see what you're
crying for. I'm young, healthy, happy. What is the crying for? . . .
It's too silly . . .
  Stephen went over to the Library that evening expressly to see
Cranly and [tell him of] narrate his latest conflict with orthodoxy.
Cranly was standing under the Library porch announcing the results of
the examinations beforehand. He was surrounded, as usual, by a little
group among whom were his friend, the clerk from the Custom House, and
another bosom friend, a very grave-looking elderly student named
Lynch. Lynch was of a very idle disposition and had allowed six or
seven years to intervene between [his] leaving school and beginning a
course in medicine at the College of Surgeons. He was much esteemed by
his colleagues because he had a deep bass voice, never 'stood' any
drinks in return for those which he accepted from others, and seldom
uttered any remarks in return for those he listened to. He always kept
both his a hands in his trousers' pockets when he walked and jutted
out his chest in a manner which was intended as a criticism of life.
He spoke, however, to Cranly principally about women and for this
reason Cranly had nicknamed him Nero. It was possible to accuse his
mouth of a Neronic tendency but he destroyed the illusion of
imperialism by wearing his cap very far back from a shock forehead. He
had unbounded contempt for medical students and their ways and, if he
had not absorbed so much Dublin into his mind, he would have been a
lover of the fine arts. He was, in fact, very interested in the art of
singing. [and] He used this interest to attempt an intimacy with
Stephen and, his gravity covering a shame-faced idealism, he had
already begun to feel through Cranly the influence of Stephen's
vivifying disorderliness. His objection, singular enough in a lax
character, to trite and meaningless execrations, to the facile
iniquities of the lips, had resulted for him in two moments of
inspiration. He execrated in yellow in protest against the sanguine
adjective of uncertain etymology and, to describe the hymeneal tract,
he had one invariable term. He called it oracle and all within the
frontiers he called oracular. The term was considered distinguished in
his circle and he was careful never to explain the process which had
discovered it.
  Stephen stood on one of the steps of the porch but Cranly did not
honour him with any kind of welcome. Stephen inserted a few phrases
into the conversation but his presence was still a unhonoured by
Cranly. He was not in the least daunted by this reception, much as he
was puzzled by it, and waited quietly for his opportunity. Once he
addressed Cranly directly but got no answer. His mind began to
ruminate upon this and at last his ruminations expressed themselves in
a prolonged smile. While he was enjoying his smile he saw that Lynch
was observing him. Lynch came down from the group and said 'Good
evening.' He then took a packet of Woodbine cigarettes from his side
pocket and offered one to Stephen, saying:
  --Five a penny.
  Stephen, who knew that Lynch was a very poor young man, accepted the
cigarette appreciatively. They smoked in silence for some minutes and
at length the group under the porch fell silent also:
  --Have you a copy of your essay? said Lynch
  --Do you want it?
  --I'd like to read it.
  --I'll bring it to you tomorrow night, said Stephen going up the
steps.
  He went up to Cranly who was leaning against a pillar and gazing
straight before him and touched him lightly on the shoulder:
  --I want to speak to you, he said.
  Cranly turned slowly round and looked at him. Then he asked:
  --Now?
  --Yes.
  They walked together up along Kildare St without speaking. When they
came to the Green Cranly said:
  --I'm going home on Saturday. Will you come as far as Harcourt St
Station? I want to see the hour the train goes at
  --All right.
  In the station Cranly spent a great deal of time reading the
time-tables and making abstruse calculations. Then he went up to the
platform and watched for a long time the shunting of the engine of a
goods train on to a passenger train. The engine was steaming and
blowing a deafening whistle and rolling billows of thick smoke towards
the roof of the station. Cranly said that the engine-driver came from
his part of the country and that he was the son of a cobbler in
Tinahely. The engine executed a series of indecisive movements and
finally settled itself on to the train. The engine-driver stuck his
head out through the side and gazed languidly along the train:
  --I suppose you would call him sooty Jaysus, said Cranly.
  --Cranly, said Stephen, I have left the Church.
  Cranly took his arm at the word and they turned away from the
platform and went down the staircase. As soon as they had emerged into
the street he said encouragingly:
  --You have left the Church?
  Stephen went over the interview phrase by phrase.
  --Then you do not believe any longer?
  --I cannot believe.
  --But you could at one time.
  --I cannot now.
  --You could now if you wanted to.
  --Well, I don't want to.
  --Are you sure you do not believe?
  --Quite sure.
  --Why do you not go to the altar?
  --Because I do not believe.
  --Would you make a sacrilegious communion?
  --Why should I?
  --For your mother's sake.
  --I don't see why I should.
  --Your mother will suffer very much. You say you do not believe. The
Host for you is a piece of ordinary bread. Would you not eat a piece
of ordinary bread to avoid causing your mother pain?
  --I would in many cases.
  --And why not in this case? Have you any reluctance to commit a
sacrilege? If you do not believe you should not have any.
  --Wait a minute, said Stephen. At present I have a reluctance to
commit a sacrilege. I am a product of Catholicism; I was sold to Rome
before my birth. Now I have broken my slavery but I cannot in a moment
destroy every feeling in my nature. That takes time. However if it
were a case of needs must -- for my life, for instance -- I would
commit any enormity with the host.
  --Many Catholics would do the same, said Cranly, if their lives were
at stake.
  --Believers?
  --Ay, believers. So by your own showing you are a believer.
  --It is not from fear that I refrain from committing a sacrilege.
  --Why then?
  --I see no reason for committing sacrilege.
  --But you have always made your Easter Duty. Why do you change? The
thing for you is mockery, mummery.
  --If I mum it is an act of submission, a public act of submission to
the Church. I will not submit to the Church.
  --Even so far as to mum?
  --It is mumming with an intention. The outward show is nothing but
it means a good deal.
  --Again you are speaking like a Catholic. The host is nothing in
outward show -- a piece of bread.
  --I admit: but all the same I insist on disobeying the Church. I
will not submit any longer.
  --But could you not be more diplomatic? Could you not rebel in your
heart and yet conform out of contempt? You could be a rebel in spirit.
  --That cannot be done for long by anyone who is sensitive. The
Church knows the value of her services: her priest must hypnotise
himself every morning before the tabernacle. If I get up every
morning, go to the looking-glass and say to myself "You are the Son of
God" at the end of twelve months I will want disciples.
  --If you could make your religion pay like Christianity I would
advise you to get up every morning and go to the lookingglass.
  --That would be good for my vicars on earth but I would find
crucifixion a personal inconvenience.
  --But here in Ireland by following your new religion of unbelief you
may be crucifying yourself like Jesus -- only socially not physically.
  --There is this difference. Jesus was good-humoured over it. I will
die hard.
  --How can you propose such a future to yourself and yet be afraid to
trust yourself to perform even the simplest mumming in a church? said
Cranly.
  --That is my business, said Stephen, tapping at his forehead.
  When they had come to the Green they crossed the streets and began
to walk round the enclosure inside the chains. A few mechanics and
their sweethearts were sitting on the swinging-chains turning the
shadows to account. The footpath was deserted except for the metallic
image of a distant policeman who had been posted well in the gaslight
as an admonition. When the two young men passed the college they both
looked up at the same moment towards the dark windows.
  --May I ask you why you left the Church? asked CranlY.
  --I could not observe the precepts.
  --Not even with grace?
  --No.
  --Jesus gives very simple precepts. The Church is severe.
  --Jesus or the Church -- it's all the same to me. I can't follow
him. I must have liberty to do as I please.
  --No man can do as he pleases.
  --Morally.
  --No, not morally either.
  --You want me, said Stephen, to toe the line with those sycophants
and hypocrites in the college. I will never do so.
  --No. I mentioned Jesus.
  --Don't mention him. I have made it a common noun. They don't
believe in him; they don't observe his precepts. In any case let us
leave Jesus aside. My sight will only carry me as far as his
lieutenant in Rome. It is quite useless: I will not be frightened into
paying tribute in money or in thought.
  --You told me -- do you remember the evening we were standing at the
top of the staircase talking about . . .
  --Yes, yes, I remember, said Stephen who hated Cranly's a method of
remembering the past, what did I tell you?
  --You told me the idea you had of Jesus on Good Friday, an ugly
misshapen Jesus. Did it ever strike you that Jesus may have been a
conscious impostor?
  --I have never believed in his chastity -- that is since I began to
think about him. I am sure he [is] was no eunuch priest. His interest
in loose women is too persistently humane. All the women associated
with him are of dubious character.
  --You don't think he was God?
  --What a question! Explain it: explain the hypostatic union: tell me
if the figure which a that policeman worships as the Holy Ghost is
intended for a spermatozoon with wings added. What a question! He
makes general remarks on life, that's all I know: and I disagree with
them.
  --For example?
  --For example . . . Look here, I cannot talk on this subject. I am
not a scholar and I receive no pay as a minister of God. I want to
live, do you understand. McCann wants air and food: I want them and a
hell of a lot of other things too. I don't care whether I am right or
wrong. There is always that risk in human affairs, I suppose. But even
if I am wrong at least I shall not have to endure Father Butt's
company for eternity.
  Cranly laughed.
  --Remember he would be glorified.
  --Heaven for climate, isn't that it, and hell for society . . . the
whole affair is too damn idiotic. Give it up. I am very young. When I
have a beard to my middle I will study Hebrew and then write to you
about it.
  --Why are you so impatient with the Jesuits? asked Cranly.
  Stephen did not answer and, when they arrived in the next region of
light Cranly exclaimed:
  --Your face is red!
  --I feel it, said Stephen.
  --Most people think you are self-restrained, said Cranly after a
pause.
  --So I am, said Stephen.
  --Not on this subject. Why do you get so excited: I can't understand
that. It is a thing for you to think out.
  --I can think out things when I like. I have thought this affair out
very carefully though you may not believe me when I tell you. But my
escape excites me: I must talk as I do. I feel a flame in my face. I
feel a wind rush through me.
  --'Like a mighty wind rushing,' said Cranly.
  --You urge me to postpone life -- till when? Life is now -- this is
life: if I postpone it I may never live. To walk nobly on the surface
of the earth, to express oneself without pretence, to acknowledge
one's own humanity! You mustn't think I rhapsodise: I am quite
serious. I speak from my soul.
  --Soul?
  --Yes: from my soul, my spiritual nature. Life is not a yawn.
Philosophy, love, art will not disappear from my world because I no
longer believe that by entertaining an emotion of desire for the tenth
part of a second I prepare for myself an eternity of torture. I am
happy.
  --Can you say that?
  --Jesus is sad. Why is he so sad? He is solitary . . . I say, you
must feel the truth of what I say. You are holding up the Church
against me .
  --Allow me .
  --But what is the Church? It is not Jesus, the magnificent solitary
with his inimitable abstinences. The Church is made by me and my like
-- her services, legends, practices, paintings, music, traditions.
These her artists gave her. They made her what she is. They accepted
Aquinas' commentary on Aristotle as the Word of God and made her what
she is.
  --And why will you not help her to be so still -- you as an artist?
  --I see you recognise the truth of what I say though you won't admit
it.
  --The Church allows the individual conscience to have great . . . in
fact, if you believe . . . believe, that is, said Cranly stamping each
heavy foot on the words, honestly and truly . . .
  --Enough! said Stephen gripping his companion's arm. You need not
defend me. I will take the odds as they are.
  They paced along three sides of the Green in silence while the
couples began to leave the chains and return meekly to their modest
resting-places and after a while Cranly began to explain to Stephen
how he too had felt a desire for life -- a life of freedom and
happiness -- when he had been younger and how at that time he too had
been about to leave the Church in search of happiness but that many
considerations had restrained him.


                               XXII


  Cranly went to Wicklow at the end of the week leaving Stephen to
find another auditor. Luckily Maurice was enjoying his holidays and
though Stephen spent a great deal of his time roaming through the
slums of the city while Maurice was out on the Bull the two brothers
often met and discoursed. Stephen reported his long conversations with
Cranly of which Maurice made full notes. The younger sceptic did not
seem to share his brother's high opinion of Cranly though he said
little. It was not from jealousy but rather from an over-estimate of
Cranly's rusticity that Maurice allowed himself this prejudice. To be
rustic, in his eyes, was to be a mass of cunning and stupid and
cowardly habits. He had spoken with Cranly only once but he had often
seen him. He gave it as his opinion that Cranly never thought until
someone spoke to him and then he [gives] gave birth to some
commonplace which he would have liked to have been able to disbelieve.
Stephen thought this exaggerated [and] saying that Cranly was daringly
commonplace, that he a could talk like a pint, and that it was
possible to credit him with a certain perverse genius. Cranly's undue
scepticism and his heavy feet moved Maurice a to hit the rustic in him
with a name. He called him Thomas Squaretoes and he would not even
admit that [Cranly] he had to a certain extent the grand manner.
Cranly, in his opinion, went to Wicklow because it was necessary for
him to play the god to an audience. He will grow to dislike you, said
the shrewd young heathen, when you begin to play the god to someone
else. He will give you nothing in exchange for what you give him
whether he has it or not because his [nature] character is naturally
overbearing. He cannot possibly understand half of what you say to him
and yet he would like to be thought the only one who could understand
you. He wants to become more and more necessary to you until he can
have you in his power. Be careful never to show any weakness to him
when you are together. You can have him in your power so long as you
hold the whip-hand. Stephen replied that he thought this was a very
novel conception of friendship which could not be proved true or false
by debate alone but that he was himself the conscious possessor of an
intuitive instrument which might be trusted to register any enmity as
soon as it appeared. He defended his friend and his friendship at the
same time.
  The summer was dull and warm. a Nearly every day Stephen wandered
through the slums watching the sordid lives of the inhabitants. He
read all the street-ballads which were stuck in the dusty windows of
the Liberties. He read the racing names and prices scrawled in blue
pencil outside the dingy tobacco-shops, the windows of which were
adorned with scarlet police journals. He examined all the book-stalls
which offered old directories and volumes of sermons and unheard-of
treatises [for] at the rate of a penny each or three for twopence. He
often posted himself opposite one of the factories in old Dublin at
two o'clock to watch the hands coming out to dinner -- principally
young boys and girls with colourless, expressionless faces, who seized
the opportunity to be gallant in their way. He drifted in and out of
interminable chapels in which an old man dozed on a bench or a clerk
dusted the woodwork or an old woman prayed before the candle she had
lighted. As he walked slowly through the maze of poor streets he
stared proudly in return for the glances of stupid wonder that he
received and watched from under his eyes the great cow-like trunks of
police constables swing slowly round after him as he passed them.
These wanderings filled him with deep-seated anger and whenever he
encountered a burly black-vested priest taking a stroll of pleasant
inspection through these warrens full of swarming and cringing
believers he cursed the farce of Irish Catholicism: an island
[whereof] the inhabitants of which entrust their wills and minds to
others that they may ensure for themselves a life of spiritual
paralysis, an island in which all the power and riches are in the
keeping of those whose kingdom is not of this world, an island in
which Caesar [professes] confesses Christ and Christ confesses Caesar
that together they may wax fat upon a starveling rabblement which is
bidden ironically to take to itself this consolation in hardship "The
Kingdom of God is within you."
  This mood of indignation which was not guiltless of a certain
superficiality was undoubtedly due to the excitement of release and it
was hardly countenanced by him before he realised the dangers of being
a demagogue. The attitude which was constitutional with him was a
silent self-occupied, contemptuous manner and his intelligence,
moreover, persuaded him that the tomahawk, as an effective instrument
of warfare, had become obsolete. He acknowledged to himself in honest
egoism that he could not take to heart the distress of a nation, the
soul of which was antipathetic to his own, so bitterly as the
indignity of a bad line of verse: but at the same time he was nothing
in the world so little as an amateur artist. He wished to express his
nature freely and fully for the benefit of a society which he would
enrich and also for his own benefit, seeing that it was part of his
life to do so. It was not part of his life to undertake an extensive
alteration of society but he felt the need to express himself such an
urgent need, such a real need, that he was determined no conventions
of a society, however plausibly mingling pity with its tyranny, should
be allowed to stand in his way, and though a taste for elegance and
detail unfitted him for the part of demagogue, [in] from his general
attitude he might have been supposed not unjustly an ally of the
collectivist politicians, who are often very seriously upbraided by
[believers] opponents who believe in Jehovahs, and decalogues and
judgments [for] with sacrificing the reality to an abstraction.
  That kind of Christianity which is called Catholicism seemed to him
to stand in his way and forthwith he removed it. He had been brought
up in the belief of the Roman supremacy and to cease to be a Catholic
for him meant to cease to be a Christian. The idea that the power of
an empire is weakest at its borders requires some modification for
everyone knows that the Pope cannot govern Italy as he governs Ireland
nor is the Tsar as terrible an engine to the tradesmen of S.
Petersburg as he is to the little Russian of the Steppes. In fact in
many cases the government of an empire is strongest at its borders and
it is invariably strongest there in the case when its power at the
centre is on the wane. The waves of the rise and fall of empires do
not travel with the rapidity of waves of light and it will be perhaps
a considerable time before Ireland will be able to understand that the
Papacy is no longer going through a period of anabolism. The bands of
pilgrims who are shepherded safely across the continent by their Irish
pastors must shame the jaded reactionaries of the eternal city by
their stupefied intensity of worship in much the same way as the
staring provincial newly arrived from Spain or Africa may have piqued
the loyalty of some smiling Roman for whom [the his past had but] the
future of his race was becoming uncertain as its past had already
become obvious. Though it is evident on the one hand that this
persistence of Catholic power in Ireland must intensify very greatly
the loneliness of the Irish Catholic who voluntarily outlaws himself
yet on the other hand the force which he must generate to propel
himself out of so strong and intricate a tyranny may often be
sufficient to place him beyond the region of re-attraction. It was, in
fact, the very fervour of Stephen's former religious life which
sharpened for him now the pains of his solitary position and at the
same time hardened into a less pliable, a less appeasable enmity
molten rages and glowing transports on which the emotions of
helplessness and loneliness and despair had first acted as chilling
influences.
  The tables in the Library were deserted during the summer months and
whenever Stephen wandered in there he found few faces that he knew.
Cranly's friend [O'Neill] Glynn, the clerk from [the Custom House]
Guinness', was one of these familiar faces: he was very busy all the
summer reading philosophical handbooks. Stephen had the misfortune to
be captured one night by [O'Neill] Glynn, who at once attempted a
conversation on the modern school of Irish writers -- a subject of
which Stephen knew nothing -- and he had to listen to an inconstant
stream of literary opinions. These opinions were not very interesting:
Stephen, for instance, [was] grew rather weary of [O'Neill's] Glynn's
telling him what beautiful poetry Byron and Shelley and Wordsworth and
Coleridge and Keats and Tennyson wrote, and of hearing that Ruskin and
Newman and Carlyle and Macaulay were the greatest modern English prose
stylists. At last when [O'Neill] Glynn was about to begin an account
of a literary paper which his sister had read to the Girls' Debating
Society in Loreto Convent Stephen thought he was justified in putting
a closure on the conversation, somewhat in Cranly's manner, by asking
[O'Neill] Glynn very pointedly could he manage to get him a 'pass' to
see the Brewery. The request was made in such a tone of subdued
thirsty curiosity that [O'Neill] Glynn was too discouraged to continue
his literary criticism and promised to do his best to get the 'pass.'
Another reader in the Library who seemed to wish to be very friendly
with Stephen was a young student named Moynihan who had been elected
Auditor of the Literary and Historical Society for the following year.
He had to read his inaugural address in November and he had chosen as
his subject "Modern Unbelief and Modern Democracy." He was an
extremely [small] ugly young man with a wide mouth which gave the idea
that it was under his chin until the face was seen at close quarters,
eyes of an over-washed olive green colour set viciously close
together, and large rigid ears standing far apart. He took a most
agitated interest in the success of his paper as he was going to be a
solicitor and he relied on this inaugural address to make his name
known. He had not yet developed the astuteness of the legal mind in as
much as he imagined that Stephen shared his agitated interest
concerning the inaugural address. Stephen came upon him one night
while he was busily 'making-up' his subject. He had some bulky volumes
by Lecky at his side and he was reading and making notes upon an
article in the <Encyclopaedia Britannica> under the heading of
'Socialism.' He desisted from his labours when he saw Stephen and
began to explain the preparations which the committee were making. He
showed the letters which had been received from various public men who
had been written to by the committee to know if they would speak. He
showed the patterns of the cards of invitation which they had decided
to have printed and he showed a copy of the notice which was to be
sent to all the papers. Stephen who did not know Moynihan very well
was surprised at all these confidences. Moynihan said he was sure
Stephen would be the auditor who would be elected after him and added
how much he had admired the style of Stephen's paper. After this he
began to discuss his own and Stephen's prospects for the degree. He
said German was more useful than Italian (though, of course, Italian
was more beautiful as a language) and that he had always studied it
for that reason. When Stephen rose to go Moynihan said he might as
well go too and put up his books. He came along Nassau St to catch his
tram for Palmerston Park and on the way, the night being wet and the
streets black and glistening with rain, he united himself still more
intimately with his successor-designate by little ejaculations and
glances in the wake of a hospital nurse who wore brown stockings and
pink petticoats. Stephen was not at all displeased by the spectacle
which he had been quietly observing for a long time before Moynihan
had caught sight of it but Moynihan's [ejaculatory desi] desirous
ejaculations reminded him of the clicking of a type-writing machine.
Moynihan who by this time was on famous terms with him said he would
like to know Italian on account of Boccaccio and the other Italian
writers. He told Stephen that if he wanted to read something 'smutty'
[that] the <Decameron> took the biscuit for 'smut.'
  --I wish I was like you, he said, it must be ten times as bad in the
original. I can't tell you now because here's my tram . . . but it
takes the biscuit for downright . . . you know? . . . well, Tooraloo!
  Mr Daedalus had not an acute sense of the rights of private
property: he paid rent very rarely. To demand money for eatables
seemed to him just but to expect people to pay for shelter the
exorbitant sums which are demanded annually by house-owners in Dublin
seemed to him unjust. He had now been a year in his house in Clontarf
and for that year he had paid a quarter's rent. The writ which had
been first served on him had contained a legal flaw and this fact
enabled him to prolong his term of occupancy. Just now matters were
drawing to a head and he was scouring the city for another house. A
private message from a friend in the Sheriff's office gave him exactly
five days of grace and every morning he brushed his silk hat very
diligently and polished his eyeglass and went forth humming derisively
to offer himself as a bait to landlords. The halldoor was often banged
loudly on these occasions as the only possible close of an
altercation. The results of the examination had awarded Stephen a mere
pass and his father told him very confidentially that he had better
look out for some kind of a doss because in a week's time they would
all be out on the street. The funds in the house were very low for the
new furniture had fetched very little after its transport piece-meal
to a pawn-office. Tradesmen who had seen it depart had begun a game of
knocking and ringing which was very often followed by the curious eyes
of street-urchins. Isabel was lying upstairs in the backroom, day by
day growing more wasted and querulous. The doctor came twice a week
now and ordered her delicacies. Mrs Daedalus had to set her wits to
work to provide even one substantial meal every day and she certainly
had no time to spare between accomplishing this feat, appeasing the
clamour at the halldoor, parrying her husband's ill-humour and
attending on her dying daughter. As for her sons, one was a
freethinker, the other surly. Maurice ate dry bread, muttered
maledictions against his father and his father's creditors, practised
pushing a heavy flat stone in the garden and raising and lowering a
broken dumb-bell, and trudged to the Bull every day that the tide
served. In the evening he wrote his diary or went out for a walk by
himself. Stephen wandered about morning, noon and night. The two
brothers were not often together [until after]. One dusky summer
evening [when] they walked into each other very gravely at a corner
and both burst out laughing: and after that they sometimes went for
walks together in the evening and discussed the art of literature.
  Stephen had lent his essay to Lynch as he had promised to do and
this loan had led to a certain intimacy. Lynch had almost taken the
final vows in the order of the discontented but Stephen's unapologetic
egoism, his remorseless lack of sentiment for himself no less than for
others, gave him pause. His taste for fine arts, which had always
seemed to him a taste which should be carefully hidden away, now began
to encourage itself timidly. He was also very much relieved to find
Stephen's estheticism united with a sane and conscienceless acceptance
of the animal needs of young men for, being a shrewd animal himself,
he had begun to suspect from Stephen's zeal and loftiness of discourse
at least an assertion of that incorrigible virginity which the Irish
race demands alike from any John who would baptise it or from any Joan
who would set it free as the first heavenly proof of fitness for such
high offices. Daniel's household had become so wearisome to Stephen
that he had discontinued his Sunday visits there and had substituted
rambles with Lynch through the city. They made their way with
difficulty along the crowded streets where underpaid young men and
flaunting girls were promenading in bands. After a few of these
rambles Lynch had absorbed the new terms which expressed the new point
of view and he began to feel that he was justifying the contempt to
which the spectacle of Dublin manners had always moved him. Many times
they stopped to confer in scrupulous slang with the foolish virgins of
the city, whose souls were almost terrified out of their naughty
intentions by the profundity of the tones of the elder of the young
men, and Lynch, sunning himself in a companionship which was so alert
and liberal, so free from a taint of secret competition or patronage,
began to wonder how he could ever have thought Stephen an affected
young man. Everyone, he thought now, who has a character to preserve
must have a manner to preserve it with.
  One evening as Stephen was coming down the Library staircase after
idling away a half-hour at [a dictionary of music] a medical treatise
on singing, he heard a dress brushing the steps behind him. The dress
belonged to Emma Clery who, of course, was very much surprised at
seeing Stephen. She had just been working at some old Irish and now
she was going home: her father didn't like her to stay in the Library
until ten o'clock as she had no escort. The night was so fine that she
thought she would not take the tram. Stephen asked her might he not
see her home. They stood under the porch for a few minutes, talking.
Stephen took out a cigarette and lit it but at once knocked off the
lighted end [very] meditatively and put the cigarette back into his
case: her eyes were very bright.
  They went up Kildare St and when they came to the corner of the
Green she crossed the road and they continued to walk, but not quite
so quickly, along the gravel path beside the chains. The chains bore
their nightly burden of amorousness. He offered her his arm which she
took, leaning appreciably upon it. They talked gossip. She discussed
the likelihood of McCann's marrying the eldest of Mr Daniel's
daughters. She seemed to think it very amusing that McCann should have
a desire for matrimony but she added quite seriously that Annie Daniel
was certainly a nice girl. A feminine voice called out from the dusky
region of the couples "Don't!"
  --'Don't,' said Emma. Isn't that Mr Punch's advice to young men who
are about to marry . . . I hear you are quite a woman-hater now,
Stephen.
  --Wouldn't that be a change?
  --And I heard you read a dreadful paper in the college -- all kinds
of ideas in it. Isn't that so?
  --Please don't mention that paper.
  --But I'm sure you're a woman-hater. You've got so standoffish, you
know, so reserved. Perhaps you don't like ladies' company?
  Stephen pressed her arm a little by way of a disclaimer.
  --Are you a believer in the emancipation of women too? she asked.
  --To be sure! said Stephen.
  --Well, I'm glad to hear you say that, at any rate. I didn't think
you were in favour of women.
  --O, I am very liberal -- like Father Dillon -- he is very
liberal-minded.
  --Yes? Isn't he? she said in a puzzled manner . . . Why do you never
go to Daniel's now?
  --I . . . don't know.
  --What do you do with yourself on Sunday evenings?
  --I . . . stay at home, said Stephen.
  --You must be morose when you're at home.
  --Not I. I'm as happy as if the divil had me.
  --I want to hear you sing again.
  --O, thanks . . . Some time, perhaps . . .
  --Why don't you study music? Have Your voice trained?
  --Strange to say I was reading a book on singing tonight. It is
called . . .
  --I am sure you would make a success with your voice, she said
quickly, evidently afraid to allow him control of the conversation . .
. Have you ever heard Father Moran sing?
  --No. Has he a good voice?
  --O, very nice: he sings with such taste. He's an awfully nice man,
don't you think?
  --Very nice indeed. Do you go to confession to him?
  She leaned a little more appreciably on his arm and said:
  --Now, don't be bold, Stephen.
  --I wish you would go to confession to me, Emma, said Stephen from
his heart.
  --That's a dreadful thing to say . . . Why would you like that?
  --To hear your sins.
  --Stephen!
  --To hear you murmur them into my ear and say you were sorry and
would never [do] commit them again and ask me to forgive you. And I
would forgive you and make you promise to commit them every time you
liked and say "God bless you, my dear child."
  --O, for shame, Stephen! Such a way to talk of the sacraments!
  Stephen had expected that she would blush but her cheek maintained
its innocence and her eyes grew brighter and brighter.
  --You'd get tired of that too.
  --Do you think so? said Stephen making an effort not to be surprised
at such an intelligent remark.
  --You'd be a dreadful flirt, I'm sure. You get tired of everything
so quickly -- just the way you did in the Gaelic League.
  --People should not think of the end in the beginning of
flirtations, should they?
  --Perhaps not.
  When they came to the corner of her terrace she stopped and said:
  --Thanks ever so much.
  --Thank you.
  --Well, you must reform, won't you, and come next Sunday to
Daniel's.
  --If you expressly .
  --Yes, I insist.
  --Very good, Emma. ln that case, I'll go.
  --Mind. I expect you to obey me.
  --Very good.
  --Thanks again for your kindness coming across with me. <Au revoir!>
  --Good night.
  He waited till he had seen her enter the fourth garden of the
terrace. She did not turn her head to see if he was watching but he
was not cast down because he knew she had a trick of seeing things
without using her eyes frankly.
  Of course when Lynch heard of this incident he rubbed his hands
together and prophesied. By his advice Stephen went to Daniel's on the
following Sunday. The old horsehair sofa was there, the picture of the
Sacred Heart was there, she was there. The prodigal was welcomed. She
spoke to him very little during the evening and seemed to be in deep
conversation with Hughes, who had lately been honoured by an
invitation. She was dressed in cream colour and the great mass of her
hair lay heavily upon her cream-coloured neck. She asked him to sing
and when he had sung a song of Dowland's she asked him would he not
sing them an Irish song. Stephen glanced from her eyes to Hughes's
face and sat down again at the piano. He sang her one of the few Irish
melodies which he knew "My love she was born in the North Countree."
When his song was over she applauded loudly and so did Hughes.
  --I love the Irish music, she said a few minutes afterwards,
inclining herself towards him with an air of oblivion, it is so
soul-stirring.
  Stephen said nothing. He remembered almost every word she had said
from the first time he had met her and he strove to recall any word
which revealed the presence of a spiritual principle in her worthy of
so significant a name as soul. He submitted himself to the perfumes of
her body and strove to locate a spiritual principle in it: but he
could not. She seemed to conform to the Catholic belief, to obey the
commandments and the precepts. By all outward signs he was compelled
to esteem her holy. But he could not so stultify himself as to misread
the gleam in her eyes as holy or to interpret the [motions] rise and
fall of her bosom as a movement of a sacred intention. He thought of
his own [fervid religiousness] spendthrift religiousness and airs of
the cloister, he remembered having astonished a labourer in a wood
near Malahide by an ecstasy of oriental posture and no more than
half-conscious under the influence of her charm he wondered whether
the God of the Roman Catholics would put him into hell because he had
failed to understand that most marketable goodness which makes it
possible to give comfortable assent to propositions without in the
least ordering one's life in accordance with them and had failed to
appreciate the digestive value of the sacraments.
  Among the guests was an elder brother of Mrs Daniel's, Father Healy.
He had just come back from the United States of America where he had
been for seven years collecting money to build a chapel near
Enniscorthy. He was being feted on his home-coming. He sat in the
armchair which Mr Daniel insisted on giving him and joined the tips of
his fingers lightly together and smiled on the company. He was a
little fat white priest whose body reminded one of a new tennis-ball
and as he sat in his chair with one leg thrown smartly over the other
he kept agitating quickly a fat little foot which was encased in a fat
little creaky leather shoe. He spoke with a judicious American accent
and when he spoke the room was all ears. He was greatly interested in
the new Gaelic revival and in the new literary movement in Ireland. He
paid particular attention to McCann and to Stephen, asking both of
them many questions. He agreed with McCann that Gladstone was the
greatest man of the nineteenth century and then Mr Daniel, who was
glowing with pride at the honour he was paying so honourable a guest,
told a dignified story of Gladstone and Sir Ashmead Bartlett and
deepened his voice to reproduce the oratory of the grand old man.
During the charades [he] Father Healy kept asking Mr Daniel to repeat
to him the witticisms of the players and very often he shook laughing
when Mr Daniel had told him what a player had said. He let no
opportunity for increasing his knowledge of the interior life of the
University escape him and every allusion was beaten out into an
unmistakeable flatness before he nodded a head in satisfaction.
Attacking Stephen on the literary side he began a monologue on the
writings of John Boyle O'Reilly but finding Stephen too polite he
began to depreciate an exclusively literary training for young men.
Stephen thereupon began to tell him of the alley in the college and of
the hand-ball tournament and all with discreet earnestness.
  --I am sure now, said Father Healy putting his head shrewdly on one
side and looking genially at the youth, I am sure you would make a
good player. You're just the build.
  --O, no, said Stephen longing for Cranly's presence, I'm a poor
player.
  --So you say, said Father Healy laughing, so you say.
  --Really, said Stephen, smiling at this clever detection of [the]
his merits as a handball-player and at the recollection of Cranly's
execrations at his play.
  At last Father Healy began to yawn a little and this was taken as a
signal for handing round cups of milk and slices of bread and butter
to the young men and women, none of whom took anything stronger.
Hughes, indeed, was so frugal that he declined to eat or drink
anything at all whereat Stephen was somewhat disappointed as he could
have had a good view of the idealist. McCann who represented the
practical view of life ate rather noisily and asked for jam. This
remark made Father Healy, who had never heard it before, laugh very
heartily and made the others smile but Hughes and Stephen looked at
each other very gravely across the uninhabited tablecloth. The young
women were all sitting at one end of the table and the young men at
the other end with the result that one end of the table was very
lively and the other end very serious. Stephen after having failed to
engage in conversation a maiden aunt of the family who had fulfilled
her office by bringing in two tumblers of punch, one for Father Healy
and the other for Mr Daniel, retired silently to the piano where he
began to strum old airs and hum them to himself until someone at the
table said "Do sing us something" and then he left the piano and
returned to the horsehair sofa.
  Her eyes were very bright. Stephen's way through self-examinations
had worn him out so much that he could not but long to repose himself
in the neighbourhood of her beauty. He remembered the first mood of
monstrous dissatisfaction which had overcome him on his entrance into
Dublin life and how it was her beauty that had appeased him. Now she
seemed to offer him rest. He wondered did she understand him or
sympathise with him and was the vulgarity of her manners only a
condescension of one who was consciously playing the game. He knew
that it was not for such an image that he had constructed a theory of
art and life and a garland of verse and yet if he could have been sure
of her he would have held his art and verses lightly enough. The
longing for a mad night of love came upon him, a desperate willingness
to cast his soul away, his life and his art, and to bury them all with
her under fathoms of lust-laden slumber. The ugly artificiality of the
lives over which Father Healy was comfortably presiding struck this
outrageous instant out of him and he went on repeating to himself a
line from Dante for no other reason except that it contained the angry
disyllable "frode." Surely, he thought, I have as much right to use
the word as ever Dante had. The spirits of Moynihan and O'Neill and
Glynn seemed to him worthy of some blowing about round the verges of a
hell which would be a caricature of Dante's. The spirits of the
patriotic and religious enthusiasts seemed to him fit to inhabit the
fraudulent circles where hidden in hives of immaculate ice they might
work their bodies to the due pitch of frenzy. The spirits of the tame
sodalists, unsullied and undeserving, he would petrify amid a ring of
Jesuits in the circle of foolish and grotesque virginities and ascend
above them and their baffled icons to where his Emma, with no detail
of her earthly form or vesture abated, invoked him from a Mohammadan
paradise.
  At the door he had to resign her to others and see her depart with
insignificant courtesies and as he came home alone he led his mood
through mazes of doubts and misgivings. After that evening he did not
see her for a little time as home affairs were rather engrossing. His
father's days of grace were exciting days. It seemed likely that the
family would not have where to lay its heads when at the eleventh hour
Mr Daedalus found a roof with a friend from the North of Ireland who
was traveller for an ironmonger. Mr Wilkinson was in possession of an
oldfashioned house containing perhaps fifteen rooms of which he was
nominally a tenant but, the landlord, an old miser without kith or kin
in the world, having died very opportunely, Mr Wilkinson's tenancy was
untroubled by considerations of time or money. Mr Daedalus was allowed
a set of apartments in this dilapidated mansion for a small weekly
payment and on the night before the day fixed for his legal eviction
he moved his camp by night. The little furniture which remained to
them was carried on a float and Stephen and his brother and his mother
and his father carried the ancestral portraits themselves as the
draymen had drunk a good deal more than was good for them. It was a
clear night of late summer freshened with cold as they walked in a
body beside the sea-wall. Isabel had been removed earlier in the day
and put in Mrs Wilkinson's charge. Mr Daedalus was a long way in front
with Maurice and in high spirits with his successful manoeuvre.
Stephen followed with his mother and even she was light-hearted. The
tide was lapping softly [at] by the wall, being at the full, and
through the clear air Stephen heard his father's voice like a muffled
flute singing a love-song. He made his mother stop to listen and they
both leaned on the heavy picture-frames and listened:

           Shall carry my heart to thee
           Shall carry my heart to thee
           And the breath of the balmy night
           Shall carry my heart to thee

  In Mr Wilkinson's house there was a lofty drawing-room panelled in
oak, entirely bare of furniture except for a piano. During the winter
Mr Wilkinson had been paid seven shillings a week by a dancing club
for the use of the room on Tuesdays and Fridays but now he used the
lower end of the room as a place of general storage for hardware
samples. He was a tall one-eyed man with a silent manner and a great
power of holding his drink. He had a deep appreciation of his guest
whom he never addressed without the prefix "Mr." He was married to a
tall woman as silent as himself who read a great many novelettes and
hung half her body out of the windows while her two young children
entangled themselves in a pieces of wire-netting and coils of
gas-pipes. She had a long white face and she laughed at everything. Mr
Daedalus and Mr Wilkinson went to town every morning together and
often came back together and, during the day, Mrs Wilkinson hung out
of the windows or talked with messenger boys and milkmen while Mrs
Daedalus sat by Isabel's bedside. There could be no doubt now that the
girl was in a bad way. Her eyes were piteously enlarged and her voice
had become hollow. She sat half propped-up by pillows in the bed all
day, her damp-looking hair hanging in wisps about her face, turning
over the pages of an illustrated book. She began to whimper when she
was told to eat or when anyone left her bedside. She showed very [few]
little animation except when the piano was playing in the room below
and then she made them leave the bedroom door open and closed her
eyes. Money was still scarce and still the doctor ordered her
delicacies. The lingering nature of her illness had spread a hopeless
apathy about the household and, though she herself was little more
than a child, she must have been aware of this. Stephen alone with
persistent kindness preserved his usual manner of selfish cheerfulness
and strove to stir a fire out of her embers of life. He even
exaggerated and his mother reproved him for being so noisy. He could
not go in to his sister and say to her "Live! live!" but he tried to
touch her soul in the shrillness of a whistle or the vibration of a
note. Whenever he went into the room he asked questions with an
indifferent air as if her illness was of no importance and once or
twice he could have assured himself that the eyes that looked at him
from the bed had guessed his meaning.
  The summer closed in sultry weather. Cranly was still in Wicklow and
Lynch had begun to study for an examination in October. Stephen was
too concerned with himself to talk much with his brother. In a few
days Maurice was to return to school, that event having been delayed a
fortnight on account of what he himself called the 'boot and clothes'
complaint. Mr Wilkinson's household dragged out day after day, Mrs
Wilkinson hanging herself out of the windows and Mrs Daedalus watching
her daughter. Very often Mr Wilkinson brought his guest home after a
day's carouse and the two would sit in the kitchen for the rest of the
night talking politics loudly. When Stephen turned the corner of the
avenue he could often hear his father's voice shouting or his father's
[voice] fist banging the table. When he came in the two disputants
would ask him for his opinion but he always ate what supper there was
without re mark and [went up] retired to his room and as he went up
the stairs he could hear his father say to Mr Wilkinson "Queer chap,
you know, queer chap!" and he could imagine the heavy stare of Mr
Wilkinson's eyes.
  Stephen was very lonely. As at the beginning of the summer so now:
he wandered vaguely through the streets. Emma had gone away to the
Isles of Aran with a Gaelic party. He was hardly unhappy and yet not
happy. His moods were still waited upon and courted and set down in
phrases of prose and verse: and when the soles of his feet were too
tired [or] his mood too dim a memory or too timid a hope, he would
wander into the long lofty dusty drawing-room and sit at the piano
while the sunless dusk enwrapped him. He could feel about him and
above him the hopeless house and the decay of leaves and in his soul
the one bright insistent star of joy trembling at her wane. The chords
that floated towards the cobwebs and rubbish and floated vainly to the
dust-strewn windows were the meaningless voices of his perturbation
and all they could do was flow fl meaningless succession through all
the chambers of sentience. He breathed an air of tombs.
  Even the value of his own life came into doubt with him. He laid a
finger upon every falsehood it contained: [an] egoism which proceeded
bravely before men to be frighted by the least challenge of the
conscience, freedom which would dress the world anew in [the]
vestments and usages begotten of enslavement, mastery of an art
understood by few which owed its very delicacy to a physical
decrepitude, itself the brand and sign of vulgar ardours. Cemeteries
revealed their ineffectual records to him, records of the lives of all
those who with good grace or bad grace had accepted an obvious
divinity. The vision of all those failures, and the vision, far more
pitiful, of congenital lives, shuffling onwards amid yawn and howl,
beset him with evil: and evil, in the similitude of a distorted
ritual, called to his soul to commit fornication with her.
  One evening he sat [silent] at his piano while the dusk enfolded
him. The dismal sunset lingered still upon the window-panes in a
smoulder of rusty fires. Above him and about him hung the shadow of
decay, the decay of leaves and flowers, the decay of hope. He desisted
from his chords and waited, bending upon the keyboard in silence: and
his soul commingled itself with the assailing, inarticulate dusk. A
form which he knew for his mother's appeared far down in the room,
standing in the doorway. In the gloom her excited face was crimson. A
voice which he remembered as his mother's, a voice of a terrified
human being, called his name. The form at the piano answered:
  --Do you know anything about the body? . . .
  He heard his mother's voice addressing him excitedly like the voice
of a messenger in a play:
  --What ought I do? There's some matter coming away from the hole in
Isabel's . . . stomach . . . Did you ever hear of that happening?
  --I don't know, he answered trying to make sense of her words,
trying to say them again to himself.
  --Ought I send for the doctor . . . Did you ever hear of that? . . .
What ought I do?
  --I don't know . . . What hole?
  --The hole . . . the hole we all have . . . here.


                              XXIII


  Stephen was present in the room when his sister died. As soon as her
mother had been alarmed the priest was sent for. He was a diminutive
man who carried his head mostly on his right shoulder and spoke in a
lisping voice which was not very easily heard. He heard the girl's
confession and went away saying "Leave it to God: He knows best: leave
it to God." The doctor came with Mr Daedalus on a car, examined the
girl and asked had she seen a priest. He went away saying that while
there was life there was hope but that she was very low: he would call
in the morning. Isabel died a little after midnight. Her father who
was not quite sober walked about the room on tiptoe, cried in little
fits every time his daughter showed a change and kept on saying
"That's right, duckey: take that now" whenever her mother forced her
to swallow a little champagne and then nodded his head until he began
to cry afresh. He kept telling everyone to keep her spirits up.
Maurice sat down by the empty fireplace and gazed in the grate.
Stephen sat at the head of the bed and held his sister's hand, her
mother bending over her offering her the glass and kissing her and
praying. Isabel seemed to Stephen to have grown very old: her face had
become a woman's face. Her eyes turned constantly between the two
figures nearest to her as if to say she had been wronged in being
given life and, at Stephen's word, she gulped down whatever was
offered her. Then she could swallow no more her mother said to her
"You are going home, dear, now. You are going to heaven where we will
all meet again. Don't you know? . . . Yes, dear . . . Heaven, with
God" and the child fixed her great eyes on her mother's face while her
bosom began to heave loudly beneath the bedclothes.
  Stephen felt very acutely the futility of his sister's life. He
would have done many things for her and, though she was almost a
stranger to him, he was sorry to see her lying dead. Life seemed to
him a gift; the statement 'I am alive' seemed to him to contain a
satisfactory certainty and many other things, held up as indubitable,
seemed to him uncertain. His sister had enjoyed little more than the
fact of life, few or none of its privileges. The supposition of an
allwise God calling a soul home whenever it seemed good to Him could
not redeem in his eyes the futility of her life. The wasted body that
lay before him had existed by sufferance; the spirit that dwelt
therein had literally never dared to live and had not learned anything
by an abstention which it had not willed for itself. She had not been
anything herself and for that reason had not attached anything to
herself or herself to anything. When they were children together
people had spoken of 'Stephen and Maurice' and her name had been added
by an afterthought. Even her name, a certain lifeless name, had held
her apart from the plays of life. Stephen remembered the voices of
children crying with glee and venom:

           Stephen, the Reephen, the Rix-Dix Deephen!

but it was always with half-hearted glee and shamefaced venom that
they had called out her name:

           Isabel, the Risabel, the Rix-Dix Disabel.

  Isabel's death was the occasion of bringing to the house many of Mrs
Daedalus' relatives. They knocked a little timidly at the hall-door
and though they were very retiring in manner their host convicted them
-- the females, at least -- privately of making a cunning use of their
eyes. The males he received in the long empty drawingroom in which an
early fire had been lit. During the two nights of the girl's wake a
big company assembled in the drawingroom: they did not smoke but they
drank and told stories. [Every] The morning after the table looked
like a marine-stores so crowded was it with empty bottles, black and
green. Isabel's two brothers assisted at this wake. The discussions
were often general. One of the boys' uncles was a very shock-headed
asthmatic man who had in his youth been rather indiscreet with his
landlady's daughter and the family had been scarcely appeased by a
tardy marriage. One of Mr Daedalus' friends, a clerk in the Police
Courts, told the company of the task which a friend of his in the
Castle had in examining prohibited books:
  --Such filth, he said. You'd wonder how any man would have the face
to print it.
  --When I was a boy, said Uncle John in a very flat accent, and had
more of a taste for reading than now and much less money I used to go
to a bookshop near Patrick's Close. One day I went there to buy a copy
of the <Colleen Bawn>. The man asked me in and he showed me a book . .
.
  --I know, I know, said the clerk from the Police Courts.
  --Such a book to put into the hands of a young lad! Such ideas to
put in his head! Scandalous!
  Maurice let a moment of respectful approval pass and then he asked:
  --Did you buy the book, Uncle John?
  Everyone seemed inclined to laugh but Uncle John grew very red and
angry and went on:
  --They should be prosecuted for putting such books on sale. Children
should be kept in their places.
  Standing beside the closed piano on the morning of the funeral
Stephen heard the coffin bumping down the crooked staircase. The
mourners followed it out and seated themselves in the four carriages.
Stephen and Maurice carried the three wreaths into the mourning coach.
The hearse made for Glasnevin Cemetery at a smart trot. At the
cemetery gates six hearses were drawn up. The funeral which had drawn
up immediately before Isabel's was a funeral of someone of the poor
class. The mourners, who were huddled in sixes on outside cars, were
just scrambling down from the cars as Mr Daedalus and his
fellow-mourners drove up. The first funeral went in through the gates
where a little crowd of loungers and officials were grouped. Stephen
watched them pass in. Two of them who were late pushed their way
viciously through the crowd. A girl, one hand catching the woman's
skirt, ran a pace in advance. The girl's face was the face of a fish,
discoloured and oblique-eyed; the woman's face was square and pinched,
the face of a bargainer. The girl, her mouth distorted, looked up at
the woman to see if it was time to cry: the woman, settling a flat
bonnet, hurried on towards the mortuary chapel.
  At the mortuary chapel Mr Daedalus and his friends had to wait until
the poor mourners had first been served. In a few minutes the service
was over and Isabel's coffin was carried up and laid on the bier. The
mourners scattered in the seats and knelt timidly on their
handkerchiefs. A priest with a great toad-like belly balanced to one
side came out of the sacristy, followed by an altar boy. He read the
service rapidly in a croaking voice and shook the aspergill drowsily
over the coffin, the boy piping responses at intervals. When he had
read the service he closed the book, crossed himself, and made back
for the sacristy at a swinging [gate] gait. Labourers came in and bore
out the coffin to a barrow and pushed it along the gravel-path. The
superintendant of the cemetery shook hands with Mr Daedalus at the
door of the chapel and followed the funeral slowly. The coffin slid
evenly into the grave and the grave-diggers began to shovel in the
earth. At the sound of the first clods Mr Daedalus began to sob and
one of his friends came to his side and held his arm
  When the grave had been covered in the grave-diggers laid their
shovels upon it and crossed themselves. The wreaths were put on the
grave and after a pause for prayer the mourning party returned through
the trim alleys of the cemetery. The unnatural tension of condolence
had been somewhat relieved and the talk was becoming practical again.
They got into the carriages and drove back along the Glasnevin road.
At Dunphy's corner the carriage drew up behind the carriages of other
funerals. In the bar Mr Wilkinson stood the party the first drink: the
drivers of the carriages were called in and they stood by the door in
a clump and rubbed their coat-sleeves across their bony battered-
looking faces until they were asked to name their drink. They all
chose pints and indeed their own bodily tenements were not unlike
hardly used pewter measures. The mourners drank small specials for the
most part. Stephen, when asked what he would drink, answered at once:
  --A pint.
  His father ceased talking and began to regard him with great
attention but, Stephen feeling too cold-hearted to be abashed,
received his pint very seriously and drank it off in a long draught.
While his head was beneath the tankard he was conscious of his
startled father and he felt the savour of the bitter clay of the
graveyard sharp in his throat.
  The inexpressibly mean way in which his sister had been buried
inclined Stephen to consider rather seriously the claims of water and
fire to be the last homes of dead bodies. The entire apparatus of the
State seemed to him at fault from its first to its last operation. No
young man can contemplate the fact of death with extreme satisfaction
and no young man, specialised by fate or her stepsister chance for an
organ of sensitiveness and intellectiveness, can contemplate the
network of falsities and trivialities which make up the funeral of a
dead burgher without extreme disgust. For some days after the funeral
Stephen, clothed in second-hand clothes of two shades of black, had to
receive sympathies. Many of these sympathies proceeded from casual
friends of the family. Nearly all the men said "And how is the poor
mother bearing it?" and nearly all the women said "It's a great trial
for your poor mother'': and the sympathies were always uttered in the
same listless unconvincing monotone. McCann was also sympathetic. He
came over to Stephen while that young man was looking into a
haberdasher's window at some ties and wondering why the Chinese chose
yellow as a colour of mourning. He shook hands briskly with Stephen:
  --I was sorry to hear of the death of your sister . . . sorry we
didn't know in time. . . to have been at the funeral.
  Stephen released his hand gradually and said:
  --O, she was very young . . . a girl.
  McCann released his hand at the same rate of release, and said:
  --Still . . . it hurts.
  The acme of unconvincingness seemed to Stephen to have been reached
at that moment.
  The second year of Stephen's University life opened early in
October. His godfather had made no comment on the result of the first
year but Stephen was told that this opportunity would be the last
given him. He chose Italian as his optional subject, partly from a
desire to read Dante seriously, and partly to escape the crush of
French and German lectures. No-one else in the college studied Italian
and every second morning he came to the college at ten o'clock and
went up to Father Artifoni's bedroom. Father Artifoni was an
intelligent little <moro>, who came from Bergamo, a town in Lombardy.
He had clean lively eyes and a thick full mouth. Every morning when
Stephen rapped at his door [he] there was the noise of chairs being
disarranged before the "Avanti!" The little priest never read in the
sitting posture and the noise which Stephen heard was the noise of an
improvised lectern returning to its constituent parts, namely, two
cane chairs and a stiff blotting-pad. The Italian lessons often
extended beyond the hour and much less grammar and literature was
discussed than philosophy. The teacher probably knew the doubtful
reputation of his pupil but for this very reason he adopted a language
of ingenuous piety, not that he was himself Jesuit enough to lack
ingenuousness but that he was Italian enough to enjoy a game of belief
and unbelief. He reproved his pupil once for an admiring allusion to
the author of <The Triumphant Beast>.
  --You know, he said, the writer, Bruno, was a terrible heretic.
  --Yes, said Stephen, and he was terribly burned.
  But the teacher was a poor inquisitor. He told Stephen very slyly
that when he and his clerical companions attended public lectures in
the University the lecturer was shrewd enough to add a trifle of salt
to his criticisms. Father Artifoni accepted the salt with a relish. He
was unlike many of the citizens of the third Italy in his want of
affection for the English and he was inclined to be lenient towards
the audacities of his pupil, which, he supposed, must have been the
outcome of too fervid Irishism. He was unable to associate audacity of
thought with any temper but that of the irredentist.
  Father Artifoni had to admit one day to Stephen that the most
reprehensible moment of human delight in as much as it had given
pleasure to a human being was good in the sight of God. The
conversation had been about an Italian novel. A priest in the house
had read the novel and condemned it to the dinner-table. It was bad,
he said. Stephen urged that it had given him at least esthetic
pleasure and that, for that reason, it could be said to be good:
  --Father Byrne does not think so.
  --But God?
  --For God it might be . . . good.
  --Then I prefer to side against Father Byrne.
  They argued very acutely of the beautiful and the good. Stephen
wished to amend or to clarify scholastic terminology: a contrast
between the good and the beautiful was not necessary. Aquinas had
defined the good as that towards the possession of which an appetite
tended, the desirable. But the true and the beautiful were desirable,
were the highest, most persistent orders of the desirable, truth being
desired by the intellectual [appeased] appetite which was appeased by
the most satisfying relations of the intelligible, beauty being
desired by the esthetic appetite which was appeased by the most
satisfying relations of the sensible. Father Artifoni admired very
much the whole-hearted manner in which Stephen vivified philosophic
generalisations and encouraged the young man to write a treatise on
esthetic. It must have been a surprise for him to find in such
latitudes a young man who could not conceive a divorce between art and
nature and that not for reasons of climate or temperament but for
intellectual reasons. For Stephen art was neither a copy nor an
imitation of nature: the artistic process was a natural process. In
all his talk about artistic perfection it was impossible to detect an
artificial accent. To talk about the perfection of one's art was not
for him to talk about something agreed upon as sublime but in reality
no more than a sublime convention but rather to talk about a veritably
sublime process of one's nature which had a right to examination and
open discussion.
  It was exactly this vivid interest which kept him away from such
places of uncomely dalliance as the debating society and the warmly
cushioned sodality. Mr Moynihan's inaugural address was held in the
Aula Maxima in November. The President took the chair, surrounded by
his professors. The platform was given up to notabilities and the body
of the hall to the irregular intellectuals who go from address to
address during the winter season and never miss attendance at the
theatre when the play is not played in English. The end of the hall
was packed with the students of the college. Nine-tenths of them were
very serious and nine-tenths of the remainder were serious at
intervals. Before the paper was read Whelan received from the
president a gold medal for oratory, and one of Mr Daniel's sons a
silver medal for oratory. Mr Moynihan was in evening dress and the
front of his hair was curled. [The president clapped him] When he
stood up to read his paper the president clapped him and then the hall
clapped. Moynihan's paper showed that the true consoler of the
afflicted was not the self-seeking demagogue with his ignorance and
lax morality but the Church and that the true way to better the lot of
the working classes was not by teaching them to disbelieve in a
spiritual and material order, working together in harmony, but by
teaching them to follow in humility the life of One who was the friend
of all humanity, great and lowly, rich and poor, just and unjust,
lettered and unlettered, of One who though above all other men was
Himself the meekest of men. Moynihan alluded also to the strange death
of a French atheistic writer and implied that Emmanuel had chosen to
revenge himself on the unhappy gentleman by privily tampering with his
gas-stove.
  Among the speakers who followed Moynihan were a County Court Judge
and a retired colonel of reactionary sympathies. All the speakers
praised the work done by the Jesuits in training the youth of Ireland
for the higher walks of life. The essayist of the night was adduced as
an example. From his post beside Cranly in an angle of the hall
Stephen glanced along the ranks of students. The faces which were now
composed to seriousness all bore the same stamp of Jesuit training.
For the most part they were free from the more blatant crudities of
youth; they were not without a certain inoffensive genuine distaste
for the vices of youth. They admired Gladstone, physical science and
the tragedies of Shakespeare: and they believed in the adjustment of
Catholic teaching to everyday needs, in the Church diplomatic. Without
displaying an English desire for an aristocracy of substance they held
violent measures to be unseemly and in their relations among
themselves and towards their superiors they displayed a nervous and
(whenever there was question of authority) a very English liberalism.
They respected spiritual and temporal authorities, the spiritual
authorities of Catholicism and of patriotism, and the temporal
authorities of the hierarchy and the government. The memory of Terence
MacManus was not less revered by them than the memory of Cardinal
Cullen. If the call to a larger and nobler life ever came to visit
them they heard it with secret gladness but always they decided to
defer their lives until a favourable moment because they felt unready.
They listened to all the speakers attentively and applauded whenever
there was an allusion to the President, to Ireland or to the faith.
Temple shambled into the hall in the middle of the proceeding and
introduced a friend of his to Stephen:
  --'Scuse me, this is Fitz, decent fellow. He admires you. 'Scuse me
for introducing him, decent fellow.
  Stephen shook hands with Fitz, a grey-headed young man with a
puzzled flushed face. Fitz and Temple stood against the wall for
support as they were both a little unsteady. Fitz began to doze
quietly.
  --He's a revolutionist, said Temple to Stephen and Cranly. D'ye know
what, Cranly, I believe you're a revolutionist too. Are you a
revolutionist . . . Ah, by hell, you don't like answering that . . .
I'm a revolutionist.
  At this moment a speaker was applauded for mentioning the name of
John Henry Newman.
  --Who is he, said Temple to everyone near him, who's this chap?
  --Colonel Russell.
  --O, is this Colonel . . . What did he say? What was it he said?
  Nobody answered him so he shambled through a few more incoherent
questions and at last, unable to satisfy himself as to the Colonel's
way of thinking, called out "Hurrah for the Mad Mullah" and then asked
Cranly did he not think the Colonel was a 'bloody cod.'
  Stephen studied even less regularly during the second year than he
had done during the first. He attended lectures oftener but he seldom
went to the Library to read. The <Vita Nuova> of Dante suggested to
him that he should make his scattered love-verses into a perfect
wreath and he explained to Cranly at great length the difficulties of
the verse-maker. His love-verses gave him pleasure: he wrote them at
long intervals and when he wrote it was always a mature and reasoned
emotion which urged him. But in his expressions of love he found
himself compelled to use what he called the feudal terminology and as
he could not use it with the same faith and purpose as animated the
feudal poets themselves he was compelled to express his love a little
ironically. This suggestion of relativity, he said, mingling itself
with so immune a passion is a modern note: we cannot swear or expect
eternal fealty because we recognise too accurately the limits of every
human energy. It is not possible for the modern lover to think the
universe an assistant at his love-affair and modern love, losing
somewhat of its fierceness, gains also somewhat in amiableness. Cranly
would not hear of this: for him a distinction between ancient and
modern was a trick of words because he had in his own mind reduced
past and present to a level of studious ignobility. Stephen tried to
sustain against him that though humanity may not change beyond
recognition during the short eras known as the ages of man yet these
ages are the preys of different ideas in accordance with which every
activity, even the least, which they engender is conceived and
directed. The distinction, he argued, between the feudal spirit and
the spirit of humanity at present is not a phrase of the men of
letters. Cranly, like many cynical romanticists, held that the civil
life affected in no way the individual life and that it was possible
for men to preserve ancient superstitions and prejudices in the midst
of a machinery of modernity, just as it was possible for men to live
in the medley of machines a life of conformity and yet to be in his
heart a rebel against the order he upheld: human nature was a constant
quantity. As for the scheme of making a wreath of songs in praise of
love he thought that if such a passion really existed it was incapable
of being expressed.
  --We are not likely to know whether it exists or not if no man tries
to express it, said Stephen. We have nothing to test it by.
  --What can you test it by? said Cranly. [Jesus] The Church says the
test of friendship is to see if a man will lay down his life for a
friend.
  --You do not believe that, surely?
  --No; bloody fools of people will die for different things. McCann,
for instance, would die out of sheer obstinacy.
  --Renan says a man is a martyr only for things of which he is not
quite sure.
  --Men die for two sticks put crosswise even in this modern age. What
is a cross but two common sticks?
  --Love, said Stephen, is a name, if you like, for something
inexpressible . . . but no, I won't admit that . . . I believe it
might be a test of love to see what exchanges it offers. What do
people give when they love?
  --A wedding breakfast, said Cranly.
  --Their bodies, isn't it: that, at the very least. It is something
to give one's body even for hire.
  --Then you think that women who give their bodies for hire, as you
say, love the people they give them to?
  --When we love, we give. In a way they love too. We give something,
a tall hat or a book of music or one's time and labour or one's body,
in exchange for love.
  --I'd a damn sight sooner them women gave me a tall hat than their
bodies.
  --A matter of taste. You may like tall hats. I don't.
  --My dear man, said Cranly, you know next to nothing about human
nature.
  --I know a few elementary things and I express them in words. I feel
emotions and I express them in rhyming lines. Song is the simple
rhythmic liberation of an emotion. Love can express itself in part
through song.
  --You idealise everything.
  --You make me think of Hughes when you say that.
  --You imagine that people are capable of all these . . . all this
beautiful imaginary business. They're not. Look at the girls you see
every day. Do you think they would understand what you say about love?
  --I don't know really, said Stephen. I do not idealise the girls I
see every day. I regard them as marsupials . . . But still I must
express my nature.
  --Write the verses, anyway, said Cranly.
  --I feel rain, said Stephen stopping under a branch and waiting for
the fall of raindrops.
  Cranly stood beside him and watched his pose with an expression of
bitter satisfaction on his face.
  During his wanderings Stephen came on an old library in the midst of
those sluttish streets which are called old Dublin. The library had
been founded by Archbishop Marsh and though it was open to the public
few people seemed aware of its existence. The librarian, [was]
delighted at the prospect of a reader, showed Stephen niches and nooks
inhabited by dusty brown volumes Stephen went there a few times in the
week to read old Italian books of the Trecento. He had begun to be
interested in Franciscan literature. He appreciated not without
pitiful feelings the legend of the mild heresiarch of Assisi. He knew,
by instinct, that S. Francis' love-chains would not hold him very long
but the Italian was very quaint. Elias and Joachim also relieved the
naif history. He had found on one of the carts of books near the river
an unpublished book containing two stories by W. B. Yeats. One of
these stories was called <The Tables of the Law> and in it was
mentioned the fabulous preface which Joachim, abbot of Flora, is said
to have prefixed to his Eternal Gospel. This discovery, coming so
aptly upon his own researches, induced him to follow his Franciscan
studies with vigour. He went every Sunday evening to the church of the
Capuchins whither he had once carried the disgraceful burden of his
sins to be eased of it. He was not offended by the processions of
artizans and labourers round the church and the sermons of the priests
were grateful to him inasmuch as the speakers did not seem inclined to
make much use of their rhetorical and elocutionary training nor
anxious to reveal themselves, in theory, at least, men of the world.
He thought, in an Assisan mood, that these men might be nearer to his
purpose than others: and one evening while talking with a Capuchin, he
had over and over to restrain an impulse which urged him to take the
priest by the arm, lead him up and down the chapel-yard and deliver
himself boldly of the whole story of <The Tables of the Law>, every
word of which he remembered. Considering Stephen's general attitude
towards the Church, there was certainly a profound infection in such
an impulse which it needed great efforts of his intelligent partner to
correct. He satisfied himself by leading Lynch round the enclosure of
Stephen's Green and making that young man very awkward by reciting Mr
Yeats's story with careful animation. Lynch said he didn't know what
the story was about but, afterwards, when safely secluded in a 'snug'
he said that the recitation had given him immense pleasure.
  --These monks are worthy men, said Stephen.
  --Full, round men, said Lynch.
  --Worthy men. I went a few days ago to their library. I had great
trouble getting in: all the monks came out of different corners to spy
at me. Father [Abbot] Guardian asked me what I wanted. Then he brought
me in and gave himself a great deal of trouble going over books. Mind
you, he was a fat priest and he had just dined so he really was
good-natured.
  --Good worthy man.
  --He didn't know in the least what I wanted or why I wanted it but
he went up one page and down the next with his finger looking for the
name and puffing and humming to himself "Jacopone, Jacopone, Jacopone,
Jacopone." Haven't I a sense of rhythm, eh?
  Stephen was still a lover of the deformations wrought by dusk. Late
autumn and winter in Dublin are always seasons of damp gloomy weather.
He went through the streets at night intoning phrases to himself. He
repeated often the story of <The Tables of the Law> and the story of
the <Adoration of the Magi>. The atmosphere of these stories was heavy
with incense and omens and the figures of the monk-errants, Ahern and
Michael Robartes strode through it with great strides. Their speeches
were like the enigmas of a disdainful Jesus; their morality was
infrahuman or superhuman: the ritual they laid such store by was so
incoherent and heterogeneous, so strange a mixture of trivialities and
sacred practices that it could be recognised as the ritual of men who
had received from the hands of high priests, [who had been] anciently
guilty of some arrogance of the spirit, a confused and dehumanised
tradition, a mysterious ordination. Civilisation may be said indeed to
be the creation of its outlaws but the least protest against the
existing order is made by the outlaws whose creed and manner of life
is not renewable even so far as to be reactionary. These inhabit a
church apart; they lift their thuribles wearily before their deserted
altars; they live beyond the region of mortality, having chosen to
fulfil the law of their being. A young man like Stephen in such a
season of damp and unrest [had] has no pains to believe in the reality
of their existence. They lean pitifully [above] towards the earth,
like vapours, desirous of sin, remembering the pride of their origin,
calling to others to come to them. Stephen was fondest of repeating to
himself this beautiful passage from <The Tables of the Law>: Why do
you fly from our torches which were made out of the wood of the trees
under which Christ wept in the gardens of Gethsemane? Why do you fly
from our torches which were made of sweet wood after it had vanished
from the world and come to us who made it of old tunes with our
breath?
  A certain extravagance began to tinge his life. He was aware that
though he was nominally in amity with the order of society into which
he had been born, he would not be able to continue so. The life of an
errant seemed to him far less ignoble than the life of one who had
accepted the tyranny of the mediocre because the cost of being
exceptional was too high. The young generation which he saw growing up
about him regarded his manifestations of spiritual activity as
something more than unseemly and he knew that, under their air of
fearful amiableness, the representatives of authority cherished the
hope that his unguided nature would bring him into such a lamentable
conflict with actuality that they would one day have the pleasure of
receiving him officially into some hospital or asylum. This would have
been no unusual end for the high emprise of youth often [leads] brings
one to premature senility and [De Nerval's] a poet's boldness [was] is
certainly proved an ill keeper of promises when it induces him to lead
a lobster by a bright blue ribbon along the footpath reserved for the
citizens. He felt acutely the insidious dangers which conceal
themselves under the guise of extravagance but he was convinced also
that a dull discharge of duties, neither understood nor congenial, was
far more dangerous and far less satisfactory.
  --The Church believes that in every act a man does he seeks some
good, said Cranly. The publican wants to make money, Whelan wants to
become a County Court judge, that girl I saw you talking to yesterday
.
  --Miss Clery?
  --She wants a man and a little house to live in. The missioner wants
to make heathens [into] Christian, the librarian of the National
Library wants to make the Dublin people [into] students and readers.
[What good I understand the good which these men seek but what do you
seek?
  --The Church differentiates between the good which this man seeks
and the good which I seek. There is a <bonum simpliciter>. Then men
you mention seek a good of that kind because they are impelled by
[direct] passions which are direct even if they are menial: lust,
ambition, gluttony. I seek a <bonum arduum>.
  --It might be a <bonum> very much <simpliciter>. I don't think you
know, said Cranly.


                                  XXIV


  About this time there was some agitation in the political world
concerning the working of the Royal University. It was proposed to
institute a commission to examine into the matter. The Jesuits were
accused of working the machine for their own ends without a just sense
of impartiality. To parry the charge of obscurantism a monthly review
was started under the editorship of McCann. The new editor was in high
spirits over this event.
  --I have got nearly all the 'copy' for the first number, he said to
Stephen. I'm sure it will be a success. I want you to write us
something for the second number -- but something we can understand.
Condescend a little. You can't say we are such barbarians now: we have
a paper of our own. We can express our views. You will write us
something, won't you? We have an article by Hughes in this month.
  --Of course there is a censor? said Stephen.
  --Well, said McCann, the person who originated the idea of the paper
in the first instance was Father Cummins.
  --The director of your sodality?
  --Yes. He originated the idea so you see he acts as a kind of
sponsor to us.
  --He is the Censor then?
  --He has discretionary powers but he is not at all narrow-minded.
You needn't be afraid of him.
  --I see. And tell me, will I be paid?
  --I thought you were an idealist, said McCann.
  --Good luck to the paper, said Stephen waving his hand in adieu.
  The first number of McCann's paper contained a long article by
Hughes on <The Future of the Celt>. It contained also an article in
Irish by Glynn's sister and an editorial article by McCann in which
was narrated the history of the inception of the paper. The article
began "It was a happy thought of the director of our sodality to unite
the various elements of our college life by affording them the
opportunity of interchanging ideas and criticisms through the medium
of a University magazine. Thanks to the zeal and enterprise of Father
Cummins the initial difficulties have been surmounted and we make our
bow to the public in the expectation that the public will give us a
hearing." The paper also contained several pages of notes from various
sporting and intellectual societies in which celebrities were
'chaffed' under the thin disguise of their Latinised surnames. The
"Medical Memoes" which were signed "H20" [and] consisted of several
congratulatory paragraphs about medicoes who had passed their final
examinations and a few complimentary paragraphs about the genial
professors of the medical school. The paper also contained some
verses: <The Female Fellow>: (a swallow-flight of song) which were
signed "Toga Girilis."
  Stephen was shown the new review in the Library by Cranly who seemed
to have read it from the first line to the last. Cranly took his
friend from one item to another with great persistence, paying no heed
to Stephen's exclamations of impatience. At the "Medical Memoes"
Stephen execrated with such smothered fervour that Cranly began to
laugh between the pages of the paper and a red-faced priest who was
sitting opposite stared indignantly across his copy of <The Tablet>.
In the porch of the Library were a little knot of young men and a
little knot of young women, all provided with copies of the new
review. All were laughing and talking, making the rain an excuse for
lingering under shelter. McCann, brisk and heated with his cycling-cap
sideways on his head, went to and fro between the groups. When he saw
Stephen he approached with an air of expectancy.
  --Well? Have you seen . . . ?
  --It is a great day for Ireland, said Stephen, seizing the Editor's
hand and shaking it gravely.
  --Well . . . it is something, said McCann with a suffused forehead.
  Stephen leaned against one of the stone pillars and regarded the
farther group. She stood in a ring of her companions, laughing and
talking with them. The anger with which the new review had filled him
gradually ebbed away and he chose to contemplate the spectacle which
she and her companions offered him. As on his entrance into the
grounds of Clonliffe College a sudden sympathy arose out of a sudden
reminiscence, a reminiscent sympathy toward a [sheltered] protected
seminarist life the very virtues of which seemed to be set provokingly
before the wild gaze of the world, so provokingly that only the
strength of walls and watchdogs held them in a little circle of modish
and timid ways. Though their affectations often lacked grace and their
vulgarity wanted only lungs to be strident the rain brought him
charity. The babble of the young students reached him as if from a
distance, in broken pulsations, and lifting his eyes he saw the high
rain-clouds retreating across the rain-swept country. The quick light
shower was over, tarrying, a cluster of diamonds, among the shrubs of
the quadrangle where an exhalation ascended from the blackened earth.
The company in the colonnade was leaving shelter, with many a doubting
glance, with a prattle of trim boots, a pretty rescue of petticoats,
under umbrellas, a light armoury, upheld at cunning angles. He saw
them returning to the convent -- demure corridors and simple
dormitories, a quiet rosary of hours -- while the rain-clouds
retreated towards the west and the babble of the young men reached him
in regular pulsations. He saw far away amid a flat rain-swept country
a high plain building with windows that filtered the obscure daylight.
Three hundred boys, noisy and hungry, sat at long tables eating beef
fringed with green fat like blubber and junks of white damp bread, and
one young boy, leaning upon his elbows, opened and closed the flaps of
his ears while the noise of the diners reached him rhythmically as the
wild gabble of animals.
  --There should be an art of gesture, said Stephen one night to
Cranly.
  --Yes?
  --Of course I don't mean art of gesture in the sense that the
elocution professor understands the word. For him a gesture is an
emphasis. I mean a rhythm. You know the song "Come unto these yellow
sands?"
  --No.
  --This is it, said the youth making a graceful anapaestic gesture
with each arm. That's the rhythm, do you see?
  --Yes.
  --I would like to go out into Grafton St some day and make gestures
in the middle of the street.
  --I'd like to see that.
  --There is no reason why life should lose all grace and nobility
even though Columbus discovered America. I will live a free and noble
life.
  --Yes?
  --My art will proceed from a free and noble source. It is too
troublesome for me to adopt the manners of these slaves. I refuse to
be terrorised into stupidity. Do you believe that one line of verse
can immortalise a man?
  --Why not one word?
  --'Sitio' is a classical cry. Try [and] to improve on it.
  --Do you think that Jesus when he hung on the cross appreciated what
you would call the rhythm of that remark? Do you think that
Shakespeare when he wrote a song went out into the street to make
gestures for the people?
  --It is evident that Jesus was unable to illustrate his remark by a
correspondingly magnificent gesture but I do not imagine he uttered it
in a matter-of-fact voice. Jesus had a very pure tragic manner: his
conduct during his trial was admirable. Do you imagine the Church
could have erected such elaborately artistic sacraments about his
legend unless the original figure had been one of a certain tragic
majesty?
  --And Shakespeare . . . ?
  --I don't believe he wanted to go out into the street but I am sure
he appreciated his own music. I don't believe that beauty is
fortuitous. A man might think for seven years at intervals and all at
once write a quatrain which would immortalise him seemingly without
thought or care -- seemingly. Then the groundling will say: "O, he
could write poetry": and if I ask "How was that?" the groundling will
answer "Well, he just wrote it, that's all."
  --In my opinion you imagine all this about rhythm and gesture. A
poet according to you, is a terribly mixed-up fellow.
  --The reason you say that is because you have never seen a poet in
action before.
  --How do you know that?
  --You think my theorising very high-flown and fantastical, don't
you?
  --Yes, I do.
  --Well, I tell you you think me fantastical simply because I am
modern.
  --My dear man, that's rubbish. You're always talking about "modern."
Have you any idea of the age of the earth? You say you're emancipated
but, in my opinion, you haven't got beyond the first book of Genesis
yet. There is no such thing as "modern" or "ancient": it's all the
same.
  --What's all the same?
  --Ancient and modern.
  --O, yes, I know, everything is the same as everything else. Of
course I know the word 'modern' is only a word. But when I use it I
use it with a certain meaning . . .
  --What do you mean, for instance?
  --The modern spirit is vivisective. Vivisection itself is the most
modern process one can conceive. The ancient spirit accepted phenomena
with a bad grace. The ancient method investigated law with the lantern
of justice, morality with the lantern of revelation, art with the
lantern of tradition. But all these lanterns have magical properties:
they transform and disfigure. The modern method examines its territory
by the light of day. Italy has added a science to civilisation by
putting out the lantern of justice and considering the criminal in
[action] production and in action. All modern political and religious
criticism dispenses with presumptive States, [and] presumptive
Redeemers and Churches. [and] It examines the entire community in
action and reconstructs the spectacle of redemption. If you were an
esthetic philosopher you would take note of all my vagaries because
here you have the spectacle of the esthetic instinct in action. The
philosophic college should spare a detective for me.
  --I suppose you know that Aristotle founded the science of biology.
  --I would not say a word against Aristotle for the world but I think
his spirit would hardly do itself justice in treating of the inexact"
sciences.
  --I wonder what Aristotle would have thought of you as a poet?
  --I'm damned if I would apologise to him at all. Let him examine me
if he is able. Can you imagine a handsome lady saying "O, excuse me,
my dear Mr Aristotle, for being so beautiful"?
  --He was a very wise man.
  --Yes but I do not think he is the special patron of those who
proclaim the usefulness of a stationary march.
  --What do you mean?
  --Have you not noticed what a false and unreal sound abstract terms
have on the lips of those ancients in the college? You see what talk
they have now about their new paper. McCann is supposed to lead them
out of captivity. Doesn't that paper of theirs make you say to
yourself "O Lord, I'm glad I had no hand in this"? The toy life which
the Jesuits permit these docile young men to live is what I call a
stationary march. The marionette life which the Jesuit himself lives
as a dispenser of illumination and rectitude is another variety of the
stationary march. And yet both these classes of puppets think that
Aristotle has apologised for them before the eyes of the world. Kindly
remember the monstrous legend upon which all their life is regulated
-- how Aristotelian it is! Kindly remember the minute bylaws they have
for estimating the exact amount of salvation in any good work -- what
an Aristotelian invention !
  A week or so before Christmas Stephen was standing one night in the
porch of the Library when Emma came out. She stopped to talk with him.
She was dressed cosily in warm tweeds and the long even coils of her
white boa presented her smiling face to the wintry air. Any young man
of reasonable sanity, seeing so happy and so glowing a figure in a
cheerless landscape, would have longed to take it in his arms. She
wore a little brown fur cap which made her look like a Christmas doll
and her incorrigible eyes seemed to say "Wouldn't you like to fondle
me?" She began to chatter at once. She knew the girl that had written
<The Female Fellow> -- an awfully smart girl at that kind of thing.
They had a magazine in her convent too; she wrote "skits" for it.
  --By the way I hear dreadful things about you.
  --How is that?
  --Everyone says you have dreadful ideas, that you read dreadful
books. You're a mystic or something. Do you know what I heard a girl
say?
  --No. What?
  --That you didn't believe in God.
  They were walking along the Green inside the chains and as she said
this she gave more of her body's warmth to him and her eyes looked at
him with an expression of solicitude. Stephen looked into them
steadfastly.
  --Never mind God, Emma, he said. You interest me much more than that
old gentleman does.
  --What gentleman? said Emma frankly.
  --The middle-aged gentleman with the aviary -- Jehovah the Second.
  --You must not say such things to me, I told you that before.
  --Very good, Emma. I see you are afraid you will lose the faith. But
you needn't be afraid of my influence.
  They walked from the Green as far as the South Circular Road without
an attempt at further conversation. At every step that they took
Stephen's resolution to leave her and see no more of her became more
deeply rooted. Even as a diversion her company was slightly degrading
to his sense of dignity. As they passed under the tall trees of the
Mall she slackened her pace and, when safe from the lights of the
bridge, halted deliberately. Stephen was very much surprised as the
hour and the place made their position equivocal and, though she had
chosen the broad shadow of the trees to halt in, she had committed
this audacity in sight of her own house. They listened for a moment to
the quiet flowing of the water and saw the tram begin to crawl off the
apex of the bridge.
  --Do I interest you so much as that? she said, speaking at last in a
rich significant voice.
  --Of course you do, said Stephen trying to match her tone. I know
that you are alive and human.
  --But so many people are alive.
  --You are a woman, Emma.
  --Would you call me a woman now? Don't you think I am still a girl?
  Stephen's gaze traversed the provoking territory for a few moments
during which her half-closed eyes suffered the trespass without
remonstrating.
  --No, Emma, he said. You are not a girl any longer.
  --But you are not a man, are you? she said quickly for pride and
youth and desire were beginning to inflame her cheek even in the
shadow.
  --I am a hobbledehoy, said Stephen.
  She leaned a little more towards him and the same expression of
tender solicitude appeared in her eyes. The warmth of her body seemed
to flow into his and without a moment's hesitation he put his hand
into his pocket and began to finger out his coins.
  --I must be going in, she said.
  --Good night, said Stephen smiling.
  When she had gone in he went along by the canal bank, still in the
shadow of the leafless trees, humming to himself the chant of the Good
Friday Gospel. He thought of what he had said to Cranly that when
people love they give and he said aloud "I will never speak to her
again." As he came near the lower bridge a woman emerged from the
shadows and said "Good-night, love." Stephen stood still and looked at
her. She was an undersized woman and even in that chilly season her
clothes gave off an odour of ancient sweats. A black straw hat was set
rakishly [upon] above her glazed face. She asked him to come for a
little walk. Stephen did not speak to her but, still humming the chant
of the passion, transferred his coins to her hand and continued on his
way He heard her benedictions at his back as he walked and he began to
wonder which was better from the literary point of view: Renan's
account of the death of Jesus or the account given by the evangelists.
He had once heard a preacher allude in horrified piety to the theory
put forward by some literary agent of the devil that Jesus was a
maniac. The woman in the black straw hat would never believe that
Jesus was a maniac and Stephen shared her opinion. He is certainly a
great exemplar for bachelors, he said to himself, but he is a little
too careful of himself for a divine person. The woman in the black
straw hat has never heard of the name of Buddha but Buddha's character
seems to have been superior to that of Jesus with respect to
unaffected sanctity. I wonder how she would like that story of
Yasodhara's kissing Buddha after his illumination and penance. Renan's
Jesus is a trifle Buddhistic but the fierce eaters and drinkers of the
western world would never worship such a figure. Blood will have
blood. There are some people in this island who sing a hymn called
"Washed in the blood of the Lamb" by way of easing the religious
impulse. Perhaps it's a question of l impulse] diet but I would prefer
to wash in rice-water. Yeow! what a notion! A blood-bath to cleanse
the spiritual body of all its sinful sweats . . . The sense of decorum
makes that woman wear a black straw hat in midwinter. She said to me
"Good night, love." The greatest lover of all time could not say more
than that. Think of it. "Good night, love." Mustn't the devil be
annoyed to hear her described as an evil creature?
  --I am not going to see her any more, said Stephen a few nights
later to Lynch.
  --That is a great mistake, said Lynch expanding his chest.
  --It's only waste of time. I'll never get what I want from her.
  --And what do you want from her?
  --Love.
  --Eh?
  --Love.
  Lynch halted abruptly, saying:
  --Look here, I have fourpence . .
  --You have?
  --Let us go in somewhere. But if I give you a drink you must promise
not to say that any more.
  --Say what?
  --That word.
  --'Love' is it?
  --Let us go in here.
  When they were sitting in the squalid gloom of a tavern Stephen
began to rock his [chair] stool from leg to leg meditatively.
  --I see I have educated you too much, my good Lynch?
  --But that was an atrocity, said Lynch enjoying the luxury of
entertaining and rebuking his companion.
  --You do not believe me?
  --Of course not.
  Stephen concerned himself with his pewter measure for a little time.
  --Of course, he said at last, I would take something less if she
would give it to me.
  --O, I know you would.
  --Would you like me to seduce her?
  --Very much. It would be very interesting.
  --Ah, it wouldn't be possible!
  Lynch laughed.
  --The sorrow-stricken tone you say that in. I wish McCann could hear
you.
  --You know, Lynch, said Stephen, we may as well acknowledge openly
and freely. We must have women.
  --Yes: I agree. We must have women.
  --Jesus said "Whoso looketh upon a woman to lust after her hath
already committed adultery with her in his heart": but he did not
condemn "adultery." Besides it is impossible not to commit "adultery."
  --Quite impossible.
  --Consequently if I see a woman inclined for oracle I go to her: if
she has no inclination I stay away.
  --But that girl has an inclination for oracle.
  --That's the tantalising part of it: I know she has. It's very
unfair of her to tantalise me. I must go to where I am sure of my
ground.
  --But that costs money; and besides it is dangerous. You may get a
dose that will last you your life. I wonder you have not got it before
this.
  --Ah, yes, isn't it a nuisance. And yet I must go somewhere . . .
She is a human being, you know. I can't say I consider harlots as
human beings. <Scortum> and <moechus> are both neuter nouns.
  --Of course a human being would be much better. But you could get
her, if you liked.
  --How?
  --In marriage.
  --I'm glad you reminded me of that, said Stephen. I was almost
forgetting it.
  --You may be sure she doesn't forget it, said Lynch, or let anyone
else forget it either.
  Stephen sighed.
  --You remember in <The Adoration of the Magi> -- "When the immortals
wish to overthrow the things that are today and to bring the things
that were yesterday they have no-one to help them except one whom the
things that are today have cast out."
  --Yes.
  --Who have I to help me except the woman in the black straw hat? And
yet I wish to bring to the world the spiritual renewal which the poet
brings to it . . . No, I have decided. I will not see her any more.
  --The woman in the black straw hat?
  --No, the virgin.
  --Still I think you are making a mistake, said Lynch, finishing his
pint.
  One raw misty morning after Christmas Stephen was reading <Oreste>
in Father Artifoni's bedroom. He asked questions mechanically and
listened to answers mechanically. He devised the following question
and answer for the pseudo-classical catechism:
  <Question> -- What great truth do we learn from the
<Libation-Pourers> of Eschylus?
  <Answer> -- We learn from the Libation-Pourers of Eschylus that in
ancient Greece brothers and sisters took the same size in boots.
  He looked wearily from the wretched Italian binding of his book
towards the desolate gardens of S. Stephen's Green. Above him and
beneath him and around him in little dark dusty rooms the intellectual
heart of Ireland was throbbing -- young men were engaged in the
pursuit of learning. Above and beneath and around him were posted
Jesuits to guide the young men amid the perilous ways of knowledge.
The hand of Jesuit authority was laid firmly upon that intellectual
heart and if, at times, it bore too heavily thereon what a little
cross was that! The young men were sensible that such severity had its
reasons. They understood it as an evidence of watchful care and
interest, assured that in their future lives this care would continue,
this interest be maintained: the exercise of authority might be
sometimes (rarely) questionable, its intention, never. Who, therefore,
readier than these young men to acknowledge gratefully the sallies of
some genial professor or the surliness of some door-porter? Who more
solicitous to cherish in every way and to advance in person the honour
of Alma Mater?
  The mortifying atmosphere of the college crept about Stephen's
heart. For his part he was at the difficult age, dispossessed and
necessitous, sensible of all that was ignoble in such manners, who in
revery, at least, had been acquainted with nobility. As a remedy for
so untoward a malady an earnest Jesuit [had some days before] was to
prescribe a clerkship in Guinness's: and doubtless the clerk-designate
of a brewery would not have had scorn and pity only for an admirable
community had it not been that he desired, in the language of the
schoolmen, an arduous good. Impossible that he should find his soul's
sufficient good in societies for the encouragement of thought among
laymen, or any other than bodily solace in the warm sodality, in the
company of those foolish and grotesque virginities! Impossible that a
temperament ever trembling towards its ecstasy should submit to
acquiesce, that a soul should decree servitude for its portion over
which the image of beauty had fallen as a mantle.
  The deadly chill of the atmosphere of the college paralysed
Stephen's heart. In a stupor of powerlessness he reviewed the plague
of Catholicism. He seemed to see the vermin begotten in the catacombs
in an age of sickness and cruelty issuing forth upon the plains and
mountains of Europe. Like the plague of locusts described in Callista
they seemed to choke the rivers and fill the valleys up. They obscured
the sun. Contempt of [the body] human nature, weakness, nervous
tremblings, fear of day and joy, distrust of man and life, hemiplegia
of the will, beset the body burdened and disaffected in its members by
its black tyrannous lice. Exultation of the mind before joyful beauty,
exultation of the body in free confederate labours, every natural
impulse towards health and wisdom and happiness had been corroded by
the pest of these vermin. The spectacle of the world in thrall filled
him with the fire of courage. He, at least, though living at the
farthest remove from the centre of European culture, marooned on an
island in the ocean, though inheriting a will broken by doubt and a
soul the steadfastness of whose hate became as weak as water in siren
arms, would live his own life according to what he recognised as the
voice of a new humanity, active, unafraid and unashamed.
  He followed his Italian lesson mechanically, feeling the
unintermittent deadliness of the atmosphere of the college in his
throat and lungs, obscuring his eyes and obfuscating his brain. The
little iron watch on the table had barely passed the half hour: eleven
o'clock seemed so far off. He had to open his Machiavelli and read out
a paragraph until the teacher's ear was satisfied. The dingy chronicle
fell piecemeal from his lips, dull wooden words. From time to time he
glanced up from the page to see the thick mouth of the priest correct
his slovenly 'o's now with a sudden harsh ejaculation of the vowel
sound, now with a slow mute protrusion of the lips. The little iron
watch ticked on for another five minutes. Then the teacher began to
correct the exercise. Stephen gazed wearily out of the window, across
the mist-laden gardens. The air was webbed with water vapours and all
the flower-beds and walks confronted the grey of the sky with a
truculent sodden brown. Mackintoshes and overcoats came along the
walks or down the steps of the monument under their umbrellas or
surmounted by a muffled human head. The footpath inside the chains
where Stephen had so often walked with his friends at night glistened
like a grey mirror. Stephen watched the feet pass along the polished
surface: he wondered if it was his moments of excessive vitality which
cast back by revulsion on such hours of despair. He felt that he was
looking at the world with Cranly's eyes and still he continued gazing
along the footpath.
  --You cannot say, said the teacher running his pencil under a
phrase. It is not Italian.
  Stephen withdrew his eyes from the window suddenly and stood up:
  --Will you please excuse me, sir. I am . . . I forgot to tell you
that today I must go away earlier . . . I am afraid I shall be late,
he added looking at the watch. Will you excuse me?
  --You have an appointment now?
  --Yes, I nearly forgot. You must excuse me for today .
  --Certainly, certainly. You can go now.
  --Thanks. I am afraid I . . .
  --Certainly, certainly.
  With a flying hand for the banisters he ran down the stairs, taking
five steps at a time. He struggled into his raincoat in the hall and
emerged panting and half-dressed on to the front steps. He ran out
into the middle of the muddy roadway and peered through the dull light
towards the eastern side of the square. He walked on swiftly in the
middle of the road with his eyes fixed on the same point and then came
in again on the footpath and began to run. When he reached the corner
of Earlsfort Terrace he stopped running and turning to the right
walked on again swiftly. Outside of the University he came alongside
of the object which he had been pursuing.
  --Good morning!
  --Stephen! . . . Have you been running?
  --Yes.
  --Where are you going to?
  --I saw you from the window.
  --What window?
  --In the college. Where are you going?
  --I am going to Leeson Park.
  --This way, said Stephen taking her arm.
  She seemed as if she were about to resent such an act in broad
daylight but after a quick glance of remonstrance allowed him to
escort her. Stephen held her arm tightly to his side and discomposed
her somewhat by speaking very close to her face. Her face was
glistening with mist and it had begun to glow in answer to his excited
and passionate manner.
  --Where did you see me?
  --I was in the window at my Italian lesson with Father Artifoni. I
saw you come through the Green and cross the road.
  --Did you?
  --So I jumped up at once and asked him to excuse me as I had to keep
an appointment and flew downstairs and out after you.
  The colour had begun to deepen very much on her cheek and it was
plain that she was trying to appear quite at her ease. At first she
had been flattered but now she was becoming a little nervous. She
laughed nervously when he told her [why] that he had run out after
her.
  --Goodness! Why did you do that?
  Stephen did not answer but he pressed her arm fiercely to his side.
At the end of the terrace she turned into a side street instinctively.
Here she walked more slowly. The street was very quiet and they both
lowered their voices.
  --How did you know it was I? she said. You must have good sight.
  --I was gazing out of the window, he answered, looking at the sky
and the Green. Lord God! I felt so full of despair. Sometimes I am
taken that way: I live such a strange life -- without help or sympathy
from anyone. Sometimes I am afraid of myself. I call those people in
the college not men but vegetables . . . Then while I was cursing my
own character I saw you.
  --Yes? she said looking at the disorderly figure beside her out of
her large oval eyes.
  --You know I was delighted to see you. I had to jump up and rush
out. I couldn't have sat there another minute . . . I said, Here is a
human creature at last . . . I can't tell you how delighted I was.
  --You strange boy! she said. You mustn't go running about like that.
You must have more sense.
  --Emma! cried Stephen, don't start talking to me like that today. I
know you want to be very sensible. But you and I -- we are both young,
aren't we?
  --Yes, Stephen.
  --Very good, then. If we're young we feel happy. We feel full of
desire.
  --Desire?
  --Do you know when I saw you . . .
  --Yes, how did you know me?
  --I knew the stride.
  --Stride!
  --Do you know, Emma, even from my window I could see your hips
moving inside your waterproof? I saw a young woman walking proudly
through the decayed city. Yes, that's the way you walk: you're proud
of being young and proud of being a woman. Do you know when I caught
sight of you from my window -- do you know what I felt?
  There was no use in her essaying indifference now. Her cheeks were
covered with a persistent flush and her eyes shone like gems. She
gazed straight before her and her breath began to be agitated. They
stood together in the deserted street and he continued speaking, a
certain ingenuous disattachment guiding his excited passion.
  --I felt that I longed to hold you in my arms -- your body. I longed
for you to take me in your arms. That's all . . . Then I thought I
would run after you and say that to you . . . Just to live one night
together, Emma, and then to say goodbye in the morning and never to
see each other again! There is no such thing as love in the world:
only people are young . . .
  She tried to take her arm away from his and murmured as if she were
repeating from memory:
  --You are mad, Stephen.
  Stephen let go her arm and took her hand in his, saying:
  --Goodbye, Emma . . . I felt that I wanted to say that to you for my
own sake but if I stand here in this stupid street beside you for much
longer I shall begin to say more . . . You say I am mad because I do
not bargain with you or say I love you or swear to you. But I believe
you hear my words and understand me, don't you?
  --I don't understand you indeed, she answered with a touch of anger.
  --I will give you a chance, said Stephen, pressing her hand close in
his two hands. Tonight when you are going to bed remember me and go to
your window: I will be in the garden. Open the window and call my name
and ask me to come in. Then come down and let me in. We will live one
night together -- one night, Emma, alone together and in the morning
we will say goodbye.
  --Let go my hand, please, she said pulling her hand away from him.
If I had known [if] it was for this mad talk . . . You must not speak
to me any more, she said moving on a pace or two and plucking her
waterproof out of his reach. Who do you think I am that you can speak
to me like that?
  --It is no insult, said Stephen colouring suddenly as the reverse of
the image struck him, for a man to ask a woman what I have asked you.
You are annoyed at something else not at that.
  --You are mad, I think, she said, brushing past him swiftly without
taking any notice of his salute. She did not go quickly enough,
however, to hide the tears that were in her eyes and he, surprised to
see them and wondering at their cause, forgot to say the goodbye that
was on his lips. As he watched her walk onward swiftly with her head
slightly bowed he seemed to feel her soul and his falling asunder
swiftly and for ever after an instant of all but union.


                              XXV


  Lynch chuckled very much over this adventure. He said it was the
most original attempt at seduction of which he had ever heard, so
original that . . .
  --You know, he said, I must tell you that to the ordinary
intelligence . . .
  --To you, that is?
  --To the ordinary intelligence it looks as if you had taken leave of
your senses for the time being.
  Stephen stared fixedly at his toes: they were sitting on a bench in
the Green.
  --It was the best I could do, he said.
  --A very bad best, in my opinion. No girl with an ounce of brains
would listen to you. That's not the way to go about it, man. You run
out suddenly after her, come up sweating and puffing and say "Let us
lie together." Did you mean it as a joke?
  --No, I was quite serious. I thought she might . . . In fact I don't
know what I thought. I saw her, as I told you, and I ran after her and
said what was in my mind. We are friends for a long time . . . Now it
seems I have acted like a lunatic.
  --O, no, said Lynch, expanding his chest, not like a lunatic but you
went about the affair so strangely.
  --If I had run after her and proposed to her, proposed marriage that
is, you would not say I had acted strangely.
  --[No, no] Even in that case . . .
  --No, no, don't deceive yourself, you would not. You would find an
excuse for me.
  --Well, you see, there is something relatively sane about marriage,
isn't there?
  --For a man of your ordinary intelligence there may be: not for me.
Have you ever read the Form of Solemnization of Marriage in the Book
of Common Prayer?
  --Never.
  --You should then. Your everyday life is Protestant: you show
yourself a Catholic only when you discuss. Well, to me that ceremony
is not acceptable: it is not so sane as you imagine. A man who swears
before the world to love a woman till death part him and her is sane
neither in the opinion of the philosopher who understands what
mutability is nor in the opinion of the man of the world who
understands that it is safer to be a witness than an actor in such
affairs. A man who swears to do something which it is not in his power
to do is not accounted a sane man. For my part I do not believe that
there was ever a moment of passion so fierce and energetic that it
warranted a man in saying "I could love you for ever" to the adored
object. Please understand the importance of Goethe . . .
  --Still marriage is a custom. To follow a custom is a mark of
sanity.
  --It is a mark of ordinariness. I admit that many ordinary people
are sane just as I know that many ordinary people have delusions. But
a capacity for being deceived by others or by oneself cannot be said
to constitute the essential part of sanity. It is rather a question
whether a man does encourage an insane condition in himself by
deceiving himself voluntarily or allowing himself to be deceived by
others voluntarily.
  --Anyhow your move was not diplomatic.
  --We all know that, said Stephen standing up, but all genuine
diplomacy is with a view to some particularly excellent plum. What
plum do you think Cranly is likely to gain by a diplomacy which is
highly meritorious in itself? What plum would I be likely to get by
proposing a diplomatic marriage except a partner "to behold my chaste
conversation, coupled with fear" -- eh?
  --The juice of the fruit, answered Lynch standing up in his turn and
looking very thirsty and tired.
  --The woman herself, you mean?
  --Exactly.
  Stephen walked along the path without saying anything for about
twenty yards: then he said:
  --I like a woman to give herself. I like to receive . . . These
people count it a sin to sell holy things for money. But surely what
they call the temple of the Holy Ghost should not be bargained for!
Isn't that simony?
  --You want to sell your verses, don't you, said Lynch abruptly, and
to a public you say you despise?
  --I do not want to sell my poetical mind to the public. I expect
reward from the public for my verses because I believe my verses are
to be numbered among the spiritual assets of the State. That is not a
simoniacal exchange. I do not sell what Glynn calls the divine
afflatus: I do not swear to love, honour and obey the public until my
dying day -- do I? A woman's body is a corporal asset of the State: if
she traffic with it she must sell it either as a harlot or as a
married woman or as a working celibate or as a mistress. But a woman
is (incidentally) a human being: and a human being's love and freedom
is not a spiritual asset of the State. Can the State buy and sell
electricity? It is not possible. Simony is monstrous because it
revolts our notion of what is humanly possible. A human being can
exert freedom to produce or to accept, or love to procreate or to
satisfy. Love gives and freedom takes. The woman in the black straw
hat gave something before she sold her body to the State. Emma will
sell herself to the State but give nothing.
  --You know even if you had proposed to buy her decently -- for State
purposes -- said Lynch, kicking his toes moodily at the gravel, she
would not have sold at the price.
  --You think not. Not even if I . . .
  --Not likely, said the other definitely. What a damn fool she is!
  Stephen blushed ingenuously:
  --You have such a nice way of putting things, he said.
  The next time Stephen met Emma in the street she did not salute him.
He did not tell the incident to anyone but Lynch. From Cranly he
expected scant sympathy and he was deterred from speaking of it to
Maurice because he had still the elder brother's wish to appear
successful. The conversation with Lynch had revealed to him with
distressing effect the commonplace side of the adventure. He asked
himself seriously and often had he expected that she would have
answered 'Yes' to his proposal. His mind, he thought, must have been
somewhat unbalanced that morning. And yet when he reconsidered his own
defence of his conduct he found it just. The economic aspect of the
affair did not present itself to him very vividly and, indeed, was
only vivid enough to make him deplore the fact that the solution of
moral problems should be so hopelessly entangled with merely material
considerations. He was not sufficiently doctrinaire to wish to have
his theory put to the test by a general [revulsion] revolution of
society but he could not believe that his theory was utterly
impracticable. The Roman Catholic notion that a man should be
unswervingly continent from his boyhood and then be permitted to
achieve his male nature, having first satisfied the Church as to his
orthodoxy, financial condition, [and] prospects and general
intentions, and having sworn before witnesses to love his wife forever
whether he loved her or not and to beget children for the kingdom of
heaven in such manner as the Church approved of -- this notion seemed
to him by no means satisfactory.
  During the train of these reflections the Church sent an embassy of
nimble pleaders into his ears. These ambassadors were of all grades
and of all types of culture. They addressed every side of his nature
in turn. He was a young man with a doubtful future and an unusual
character: this was the first salient fact. The ambassadors met it
without undue pretence or haste. They stated that it was in their
power to make smooth many of the ways which promised to be rough and,
by diminishing the hardships of the material nature, to allow the
unusual character scope and ease to develop and approve itself. He had
deplored the entanglement of merely material considerations in a
problem of morals and here, at least, was a warrant that if he chose
to give ear to the pleadings of the embassy the moral problem in his
case would be set on the road of solving itself free from minor and
unworthier cares. He had what he called a 'modern' reluctance to give
pledges: no pledges were required. If at the end of five years he
still persevered in his obduracy of heart he could still seize upon
his individual liberty without fear of being called oath-breaker
therefor. The practice of due consideration was an old one and a wise
one. He himself was the greatest sceptic concerning the perfervid
enthusiasms of the patriots. As an artist he had nothing but contempt
for a work which had arisen out of any but the most stable mood of the
mind. Was it possible that he would exercise less rigour on his life
than he desired to exercise on his art? How could he be guilty of such
foolishness, of such cynical subordination of the actual to the
abstract, if he honestly believed that an institution is to be
accounted valuable in proportion to its nearness to some actual human
need or energy and that the epithet 'vivisective' should be applied to
the modern spirit as distinguished from the ancient or
category-burdened spirit. He desired for himself the life of an
artist. Well! And he feared that the Church would obstruct his desire.
But, during the formulation of his artistic creed, had he not found
item after item upheld for him in advance by the greatest and most
orthodox doctor of the Church and was it anything but vanity which
urged him to seek out the thorny crown of the heretic while the entire
theory, in accordance with which his entire artistic life was shaped,
arose most conveniently for his purpose out of the mass of Catholic
theology? He could not accept whole-heartedly the offers of Protestant
belief: he knew that the liberty it boasted of was often only the
liberty to be slovenly in thought and amorphous in ritual. No-one, not
the most rabid enemy of the Church, could accuse it of being slovenly
in thought: the subtlety of its disquisitions had become a byword with
demagogues. No-one again could accuse the Church of being amorphous in
ritual. The Puritan, the Calvinist, the Lutheran were inimical to art
and to exuberant beauty: the Catholic was the friend of him who
professed to interpret or divulge the beautiful. Could he assert that
his own aristocratic intelligence and passion for a supremely
satisfying order in all the fervours of artistic creation were not
purely Catholic qualities? The ambassadors did not labour this point.
  Besides, they said, it is a mark of the modern spirit to be shy in
the presence of all absolute statements. However sure you may be now
of the reasonableness of your convictions you cannot be sure that you
will always think them reasonable. If you sincerely regard a pledge as
an infringement of human liberty you cannot pledge yourself against
following a reactionary impulse which is certain to overtake you some
day. You cannot leave out of sight the possibility that your views of
the world will change to such an extent that you will regard all
interference with the course of affairs as the part of such [who] as
can still be deluded by hope. In that case what will have become of
your life? You will have wasted it in efforts to save people who have
neither inclination nor aptitude for freedom. You believe in an
aristocracy: believe also in the eminence of the aristocratic class
and in the order of society which secures that eminence. Do you
imagine that manners will become less ignoble, intellectual and
artistic endeavour less conditioned, if the ignorant, enthusiastic,
spiritual slovens whom we have subjected subject us? Not one of those
slovens understands your aims as an artist or wants your sympathy: we,
on the contrary, understand your aims and often are in sympathy with
them and we solicit your support and consider your comradeship an
honour. You are fond of saying that the Absolute is dead. If that be
so it is possible that we are all wrong and if once you accept that as
a possibility what remains for you but an intellectual disdain? With
us you can exercise your contemptuous faculties when you are
recognised as one of the patrician order and you will not even be
obliged to grant a truce to the very doctrines, the success of which
in the world has secured you your patricianship. Make one with us.
Your life will be insured from grosser troubles, your art will be
safeguarded against the intrusions of revolutionary notions which no
artist of whom history tells us has ever made himself champion. Make
one with us, on equal terms. In temper and in mind you are still a
Catholic. Catholicism is in your blood. Living in an age which
professes to have discovered evolution, can you be fatuous enough to
think that simply by being wrong-headed you can recreate entirely your
mind and temper or can clear your blood of what you may call the
Catholic infection? A revolution such as you desire is not brought
about by violence but gradually: and, within the Church you have an
opportunity of beginning your revolution in a rational manner. You can
sow the seeds in the careful furrows entrusted to you and if your seed
is good it will prosper. But by going into the unnecessary wilderness
and scattering your seed broadcast on all soils what harvest will you
have? Everything seems to urge you to a course of moderation, of
forbearance; and the purified will can surely display itself quite as
well in acceptance as in rejection. The trees do not resent autumn nor
does any exemplary thing in nature resent its limitations. Neither
then do you resent the limitations of compromise.
  These pleadings which Stephen so punctiliously heard out were
supplemented by Cranly's influence. Neither of the young men [were]
was studying for [their] his examination and they spent their evenings
as usual in aimless walking and talking. Their walks and talks led
nowhere because whenever anything definite threatened to make its
appearance in their talk Cranly promptly sought the company of some of
his chosen companions. The billiard-room of the Adelphi Hotel was now
a favourite resort of the two friends. After ten o'clock every night
they went into the billiard-room. It was a big room well furnished
with ill-kept inelegant tables and poorly furnished with players.
Cranly played protracted matches with one or other of his companions
while Stephen sat on the seat that ran alongside of the table. A game
of fifty cost sixpence which was duly paid by each of the players in
equal parts, Cranly producing his threepence very deliberately from a
leather heart-shaped purse. The players sometimes sent their balls on
to the floor and Cranly occasionally swore at his flamin' cue. There
was a bar attached to the billiard-room. In the bar was a stout
barmaid who wore badly made stays, served bottles of stout with her
head on one side, and conversed in an English accent with her
customers about the theatrical companies of the different theatres.
Her customers were young men who carried their hats sideways far back
on their heads and walked with their feet far apart. Their trousers
were usually turned up high above their tan boots. One of the regular
customers at this bar ( though he did not mix with the young gentlemen
mentioned above) was a friend of Cranly's, a young man who was a clerk
in the Agricultural Board Office. He was a bandy-legged little man who
spoke very little when he was sober but very much when he was drunk.
When he was sober he was very orderly but his tipsiness, signalled by
a dark-coloured ooze upon his pock-marked face, was boastful and
disorderly. One night he engaged in a fierce argument about Tim Healy
with a thick set medical student who had a taste for the art of
self-defence. The argument was nearly entirely one-sided inasmuch as
the medical student's contributions were derisive laughs and such
remarks as "Is he handy with the mits?" "Can he put up his props?" "Is
he a good man with the mits?" At last the clerk from the Agricultural
Board Office called the medical student a dirty name whereupon the
medical student immediately knocked down all the drinks on the counter
in his efforts to 'smash' the offender. The barmaid ran screaming for
the proprietor, the medical student was soothed and restrained by
considerate friends and the offender was escorted out by Cranly and
Stephen and a few others. At first he lamented that his new cuffs were
stained with porter and expressed a great desire to go back and fight
it out but, dissuaded by Cranly, he began to tell Stephen in an
indistinct undertone that he had got the highest marks in Pure
Mathematics ever given in the degree examination. He advised Stephen
to go to London to write for the papers and said he could put him in
the right way to get on. When Cranly had begun a conversation with the
others concerning the interrupted game of billiards Stephen's
companion again announced that he had got the highest marks ever given
in the degree in Pure Mathematics.
  Stephen continued making his book of verses in spite of these
distracting influences. He had come to the conclusion that nature had
designed him for a man of letters and therefore he determined that, in
spite of all influences, he would do as nature counselled. He had
begun to consider Cranly a bad influence. Cranly's method in argument
was to reduce all things to their food values (though he himself was
the most impractical of theorists) and Stephen's conception of art
fared very badly from such a method. Stephen held the test of food
values an extreme one and one which in its utter materialism suggested
a declination from the heights of romanticism. He knew that Cranly's
materialism was only skin-deep and he surmised that Cranly chose to
express himself in language and conduct of direct ugliness simply
because his fear of ridicule and more than diplomatic wish to be well
with men urged him to refrain from beauty of any kind. He fancied
moreover that he detected in Cranly's attitude towards him a certain
hostility arising out of a thwarted desire to imitate. Cranly was fond
of ridiculing Stephen to his bar companions and though this was
supposed to be no more than banter Stephen found touches of
seriousness in it. Stephen refused to close with this trivial
falsehood of his friend and continued to [disclose] share all the
secrets of his bosom as if he had not observed any change. He no
longer, however, sought his friend's opinion or allowed the sour
dissatisfaction of his friend's moods to weigh with him. He was
egoistically determined that nothing material, no favour [of] or
reverse of fortune, no bond of association or impulse or tradition
should hinder him from working out the enigma of his position in his
own way. He avoided his father sedulously because he now regarded his
father's presumptions as the most deadly part of a tyranny, internal
and external, which he determined to combat with might and main. He
argued no further with his mother, persuaded that he could have no
satisfactory commerce with her so long as she chose to set the shadow
of a clergyman between her nature and his. His mother told him one day
that she had spoken of him to her confessor and asked his spiritual
advice. Stephen turned to her and remonstrated hotly with her for
doing such a thing.
  --It is a nice thing, he said, that you go and discuss me behind my
back. Have you not your own nature to guide you, your own sense of
what is right, without going to some Father Jack-in-the-Box to ask him
to guide you?
  --Priests know a great deal of the world, said his mother.
  --And what did he advise you to do?
  --He said if there were any young children in the house he would
advise me to get out away from there as quickly as I could.
  --Very nice! said Stephen angrily. That's a pretty thing for you to
come and say to a son of yours!
  --I am simply telling you what the priest advised me to do, said his
mother quietly.
  --These fellows, said Stephen, know nothing of the world. You might
as well say that a rat in a sewer knew the world. Anyway you won't
repeat what I say to your confessor in future because I won't say
anything. And the next time he asks you "What is that mistaken young
man, that unfortunate boy, doing?" you can answer "I don't know,
father. I asked him and he said I was to tell the priest he was making
a torpedo."
  The general attitude of women towards religion puzzled and often
maddened Stephen. His nature was incapable of achieving such an
attitude of insincerity or stupidity. By brooding constantly upon this
he ended by anathemising (<sic>) Emma as the most deceptive and
cowardly of marsupials. He discovered that it was a menial fear and no
spirit of chastity which had prevented her from granting his request.
Her eyes, he thought, must look strange when upraised to some holy
image and her lips when poised for the reception of the host. He
cursed her burgher cowardice and her beauty and he said to himself
that though her eyes might cajole the half-witted God of the Roman
Catholics they would not cajole him. In every stray image of the
streets he saw her soul manifest itself and every such manifestation
renewed the intensity of his disapproval. It did not strike him that
the attitude of women towards holy things really implied a more
genuine emancipation than his own and he condemned them out of a
purely suppositious (<sic>) conscience. He exaggerated their
iniquities and evil influence and returned them their antipathy in
full measure. He toyed also with a theory of dualism which would
symbolise the twin eternities of spirit and nature in the twin
eternities of male and female and even thought of explaining the
audacities of his verse as symbolical allusions. It was hard for him
to compel his head to preserve the strict temperature of classicism.
More than he had ever done before he longed for the season to lift and
for spring -- the misty Irish spring -- to be over and gone. He was
passing through Eccles' St one evening, one misty evening all these
thoughts dancing the dance of unrest in his brain when a trivial
incident set him composing some ardent verses which he entitled a
"Vilanelle of the Temptress." A young lady was standing on the steps
of one of those brown brick houses which seem the very incarnation of
Irish paralysis. A young gentleman was leaning on the rusty railings
of the area. Stephen as he passed on his quest heard the following
fragment of colloquy out of which he received an impression keen
enough to afflict his sensitiveness very severely.
  The Young Lady -- (drawling discreetly) . . . O, yes . . . I was . .
. at the . . . cha . . . pel . . .
  The Young Gentleman -- (inaudibly) . . . I . . . (again inaudibly) .
. . I . . .
  The Young Lady -- (softly) . . . O . . . but you're . ve. . . ry . .
. wick . . . ed . . .
  This triviality made him think of collecting many such moments
together in a book of epiphanies. By an epiphany he meant a sudden
spiritual manifestation, whether in the vulgarity of speech or of
gesture or in a memorable phase of the mind itself. He believed that
it was for the man of letters to record these epiphanies with extreme
care, seeing that they themselves are the most delicate and evanescent
of moments. He told Cranly that the clock of the Ballast Office was
capable of an epiphany. Cranly questioned the inscrutable dial of the
Ballast Office with his no less inscrutable countenance:
  --Yes, said Stephen. I will pass it time after time, allude to it,
refer to it, catch a glimpse of it. It is only an item in the
catalogue of Dublin's street furniture. Then all at once I see it and
I know at once what it is: epiphany.
  --What?
  --Imagine my glimpses at that clock as the gropings of a spiritual
eye which seeks to adjust its vision to an exact focus. The moment the
focus is reached the object is epiphanised. It is just in this
epiphany that I find the third, the supreme quality of beauty.
  --Yes? said Cranly absently.
  --No esthetic theory, pursued Stephen relentlessly, is of any value
which investigates with the aid of the lantern of tradition. What we
symbolise in black the Chinaman may symbolise in yellow: each has his
own tradition. Greek beauty laughs at Coptic beauty and the American
Indian derides them both. It is almost impossible to reconcile all
tradition whereas it is by no means impossible to find the
justification of every form of beauty which has ever been adored on
the earth by an examination into the mechanism of esthetic
apprehension whether it be dressed in red, white, yellow or black. We
have no reason for thinking that the Chinaman has a different system
of digestion from that which we have though our diets are quite
dissimilar. The apprehensive faculty must be scrutinised in action.
  --Yes . . .
  --You know what Aquinas says: The three things requisite for beauty
are, integrity, a wholeness, symmetry and radiance. Some day I will
expand that sentence into a treatise. Consider the performance of your
own mind when confronted with any object, hypothetically beautiful.
Your mind to apprehend that object divides the entire universe into
two parts, the object, and the void which is not the object. To
apprehend it you must lift it away from everything else: and then you
perceive that it is one integral thing, that is a thing. You recognise
its integrity. Isn't that so?
  --And then?
  --That is the first quality of beauty: it is declared in a simple
sudden synthesis of the faculty which apprehends. What then? Analysis
then. The mind considers the object in whole and in part, in relation
to itself and to other objects, examines the balance of its parts,
contemplates the form of the object, traverses every cranny of the
structure. So the mind receives the impression of the symmetry of the
object. The mind recognises that the object is in the strict sense of
the word, a <thing>, a definitely constituted entity. You see?
  --Let us turn back, said Cranly.
  They had reached the corner of Grafton St and as the footpath was
overcrowded they turned back northwards. Cranly had an inclination to
watch the antics of a drunkard who had been ejected from a bar in
Suffolk St but Stephen took his arm summarily and led him away.
  --Now for the third quality. For a long time I couldn't make out
what Aquinas meant. He uses a figurative word (a very unusual thing
for him ) but I have solved it. <Claritas> is <quidditas>. After the
analysis which discovers the second quality the mind makes the only
logically possible synthesis and discovers the third quality. This is
the moment which I call epiphany. First we recognise that the object
is one integral thing, then we recognise that it is an organised
composite structure, a <thing> in fact: finally, when the relation of
the parts is exquisite, when the parts are adjusted to the special
point, we recognise that it is <that> thing which it is. Its soul, its
whatness, leaps to us from the vestment of its appearance. The soul of
the commonest object, the structure of which is so adjusted, seems to
us radiant. The object achieves its epiphany.
  Having finished his argument Stephen walked on in silence. He felt
Cranly's hostility and he accused himself of having cheapened the
eternal images of beauty. For the first time, too, he felt slightly
awkward in his friend's company and to restore a mood of flippant
familiarity he glanced up at the clock of the Ballast Office and
smiled:
  --It has not epiphanised yet, he said.
  Cranly stared stolidly down the river and held his peace for a few
minutes during which the expounder of the new esthetic repeated his
theory to himself all over again. A clock at the far side of the
bridge chimed and simultaneously Cranly's thin lips parted for speech:
  --I wonder, he said . . .
  --What?
  Cranly continued to stare towards the mouth of the Liffey like a man
in a trance. Stephen waited for the sentence to be finished and then
he said again "What?" Cranly then faced about suddenly and said with
flat emphasis:
  --I wonder did that bloody boat, the <Sea-Queen> ever start?
  Stephen had now completed a series of hymns in honour of extravagant
beauty and these he published privately in a manuscript edition of one
copy. His last interview with Cranly had been so unsatisfactory that
he hesitated to show the manuscript to him. He kept the manuscript by
him and its presence tormented him. He wanted to show it to his
parents but the examination was approaching and he knew that their
sympathy would be incomplete. He wanted to show it to Maurice but he
was conscious that his brother resented having been forsaken for
plebeian companions. He wanted to show it to Lynch but he dreaded the
physical labour of urging that torpid young man into a condition of
receptiveness. He even thought for a moment of McCann and Madden. He
saw Madden rarely; the salute which the young patriot gave him on
those rare occasions was not unlike the salute which [one] a friend
who has failed gives to a friend who has succeeded. Madden spent the
greater part of his day in Cooney's tobacco-shop, sampling and
discussing <camans>, smoking very heavy tobacco and speaking Irish
with [one] newly arrived provincials. McCann was still busily occupied
in editing his magazine [for] to which he had himself contributed an
article entitled "Rationalism in Practice." In this article he
expressed the hope that mankind in the not too distant future would
use mineral, [as] instead of animal [and] or vegetable diet. The tone
of the editor's writing had become much more orthodox than his speech
had been wont to be. In the report of the general meeting of the
College Sodality which occupied a column and a half of the College
magazine it was stated that Mr McCann, in a forcible speech, had
[suggested] made many valuable suggestions for the working of the
society on a more practical basis. Stephen was surprised at this and
when one day, [when Mc] walking through Nassau St with Cranly, he
encountered the editor striding vigorously towards the Library he said
to Cranly:
  --What is Bonny Dundee at?
  --How -- at?
  --I mean . . . this sodality business he's mixing himself up in. He
can't be stupid enough to think he can use the sodality for any good
purpose.
  Cranly eyed Stephen quizzically but, after considering the matter,
decided to make no remark.
  The examination resulted in Cranly's being 'stuck' again and in
Stephen's securing a low pass. Stephen did not think it necessary to
take the results of these examinations very bitterly to heart inasmuch
as he [ judged] knew that Father Artifoni, who had presented himself
for the matriculation examination, had been awarded higher marks for
his English paper than for his Italian paper, having been tested in
the latter language by a polyglot examiner who examined in French,
Italian, Arabic, [Jewish] Hebrew, Spanish and German. Stephen
sympathised with his teacher who was ingenuous enough to express his
astonishment. One evening during the examinations Stephen was talking
to Cranly under the arcade of the University when Emma passed them.
Cranly raised his ancient straw hat (which he had once more
resurrected) and Stephen followed suit. In reply she bowed very
politely across Stephen at his friend. Cranly replaced his hat and
proceeded to meditate in the shade of it for a few minutes.
  --Why did she do that? he said.
  --An invitation, perhaps, said Stephen.
  Cranly stared continuously at the air through which she had passed:
and Stephen said smilingly:
  --Perhaps she meant it as an invitation.
  --Perhaps.
  --You're incomplete without a woman, said Stephen.
  --Only she's so flamin' fat, said Cranly, d'ye know . . .
  Stephen kept silent. He was not pleased that anyone else should
speak against her and he did not smile when Cranly took his arm saying
"Let us eke go" which [he] was always intended as an old English
expression inviting departure. Stephen had long ago debated with
himself the advisability of telling Cranly that the expression should
be amended but Cranly's persistent emphasis of the word 'eke' acted as
a deterrent.
  The announcement of the result of the examination led to a domestic
squabble. Mr Daedalus ransacked his vocabulary in search of abusive
terms and ended by asking Stephen what were his plans for the future.
  --I have no plans.
  --Well then the sooner you clear out the better. You've been having
us I see. However with the help of God and His Holy Mother I'll write
to Mullingar the first thing in the morning. There's no use in your
god-father wasting any more of his money on you.
  --Simon, said Mrs Daedalus, you always go to the fair with the
story. Can't you be reasonable?
  --Reasonable be damned. Don't I know the set he has got into --
lousy-looking patriots and that football chap in the knickerbockers.
To tell you the God's truth, Stephen, I thought you'd have more pride
than to associate with such canaille.
  --I don't think Stephen has done so badly in his examination: he
hasn't failed and after all . . .
  --She will put in her word, you know, said Mr Daedalus to his son.
That's a little hereditary habit. Her family, you know, by God they
know anything you can ask them down to the making of the mainspring of
a watch. Fact.
  --You oughtn't to run away with the story, Simon. Many fathers would
be glad to have such a son.
  --You needn't interfere between me and my son. We understand each
other. I'm not saying anything to him; but I want to know what he has
been doing for twelve months.
  Stephen continued tapping the blade of his knife on the edge of his
plate.
  --What have you been doing?
  --Thinking.
  --Thinking? Is that all?
  --And writing a little.
  --Hm. I see. Wasting your time, in fact.
  --I don't consider it waste of time to think.
  --Hm. I see. You see I know these Bohemian chaps, these poets, who
don't consider it waste of time to think. But at the same time they're
damn glad to borrow an odd shilling now and then to buy chops with.
How will you like thinking when you have no chops? Can't you go for
something definite, some good appointment in a government office and
then, by Christ, you can think as much as you like. Study for some
first-class appointment, there are plenty of them, and you can write
at your leisure. Unless, perhaps, you would prefer to be a loafer
eating orange-peels and sleeping in the Park.
  Stephen made no reply. When the harangue had been repeated five or
six times he got up and went out. He went over to the Library to look
for Cranly and, not finding him in the reading-room or in the porch,
went to the Adelphi Hotel. It was a Saturday night and the rooms were
crowded with clerks. [and] The clerk from the Agricultural Board
Office was sitting in the corner of the bar with his hat pushed well
back from his forehead and at once Stephen recognised the dark ooze
which was threatening to emerge upon his heated face. He was occupied
in twirling his moustache in the crook of his index finger, and in
glancing between the barmaid's face and the label of his bottle of
stout. The billiard-room was very noisy: all the tables were engaged
and the balls hopped on to the floor every minute or so. Some of the
players played in their shirt-sleeves.
  Cranly was sitting stolidly on the seat that ran alongside the
tables, watching a game [of]. Stephen sat beside him in silence, also
watching the game. It was a three-handed game. An elderly clerk,
evidently in a patronising mood, was playing two of his junior
colleagues. The elderly clerk was a tall stout man who wore gilt
spectacles on a face like a red shrivelled apple. He was in his
shirt-sleeves and he played and spoke so briskly as to suggest that he
was drilling rather than playing. The young clerks were both clean
shaven. One of them was a thickset young man who played doggedly
without speaking, the other was an effervescent young man with white
eyebrows and a nervous manner. Cranly and Stephen watched the game
progress, creep from point to point. The heavy young man put his ball
on to the floor three times in succession and the scoring was so slow
that the marker came and stood by the table as a reminder that the
twenty minutes had passed. The players chalked their cues oftener than
before and, seeing that they were in earnest about finishing the game,
the marker did not say anything about the time. But his presence acted
upon them. The elderly clerk jerked his cue at his ball, making a bad
stroke, and stood back from the table blinking his eyes and saying
"Missed that time." The effervescent young clerk hurried to his ball,
made a bad stroke and, looking along his cue, said "Ah!" The dogged
young man shot his ball straight into the top pocket, a fact which the
marker registered at once on the broken marking-board. The elderly
clerk peered for a few critical seconds over the rim of his glasses,
made another bad stroke and, at once proceeding to chalk his cue
[briskly], said briefly and sharply to the effervescent young man
"Come on now, White. Hurry up now."
  The hopeless pretence of those three lives before him, their
unredeemable servility, made the back of Stephen's eyes feel burning
hot. He laid his [arm] hand on Cranly's shoulder and said impetuously:
  --We must go out at once. I can't stand it any longer.
  They crossed the room together and Stephen said:
  --If I had remained another minute I think I would have begun to
cry.
  --Yes, it is bloody awful, said Cranly.
  --O, hopeless! hopeless! said Stephen clenching his fists.


                                XXVI


  A few nights before Cranly went to the country to [recruit] refresh
himself in body after his failure in the examination, Stephen said to
him:
  --I believe this will be an important season for me. I intend to
come to some decision as to my course of action.
  --But you will go for Second Arts next year?
  --My godfather may not pay. They expected I would get an exhibition.
  --And why didn't you? said Cranly.
  --I will think things out, said Stephen, and see what I can do.
  --There are a hundred things you can do.
  --Are there, faith? We'll see . . . I might want to write to you.
What is your address?
  Cranly affected not to hear this question. He was picking his teeth
with a match, very deliberately  and scrupulously, occasionally
halting to insert his tongue carefully into some crevice before
continuing the process of picking. He spat out what he dislodged. His
straw hat rested mainly on the nape of his neck and his feet were
planted far apart. After a considerable pause he returned to his last
phrase, as if he had been inwardly reviewing it:
  --Ay, hundreds of things.
  Stephen said:
  --What is your address in the country?
  --My address? . . . O . . . You see . . . it's really impossible,
d'ye know, to say what my address would be. But you won't come to any
decision before I come back . . . I'm almost sure I'll go in the
morning but I want to see at what time there's a train.
  --We looked before, said Stephen. Half past nine.
  --No . . . I think I must go up to Harcourt St to see what time
there's a train.
  They walked slowly in the direction of Harcourt St. Stephen,
refusing to nurse ill-feeling, said:
  --What mysterious purpose is concealed under your impossible
prosiness? Please tell me that. Have you anything in your mind's eye?
  --If I had a mysterious purpose, said Cranly, I wouldn't be likely
to tell you, (would I?), what it was.
  --I have told you a great deal, said Stephen.
  --Most people have some purpose or other in their lives. Aristotle
says that the end of every being is its greatest good. We all act in
view of some good.
  --Couldn't you be a bit more precise? You don't wish me to write
gospels about you, do you? . . . Are you really thinking of being a
pork-butcher?
  --Yes, really. Would you not think of it. You could wrap your
sausages in your love-poems.
  Stephen laughed.
  --You mustn't think you can impose on me, Cranly, he said. I know
you are damnably romantic.
  At Harcourt St Station they went up to the time-table and after a
glance at it Stephen said mischieviously [<sic>]:
  --Half past nine, as I told you. You see you wouldn't take a fool's
word for it.
  --That's another train, said Cranly impatiently.
  Stephen smiled with enjoyment while Cranly began to examine the
chart, murmuring the names of the stations to himself and calculating
time. In the end he seemed to arrive at some decision for he said to
Stephen "Let us eke go." Outside the station Stephen pulled his
friend's coat-sleeve and pointed to a newsbill which was exposed to
public gaze on the roadway, held down at the corners by four stones.
  --Have you seen this?
  [Cranly] They stopped to read the [items] bill and four or five
people also stopped to read it. Cranly read out the items in his
flattest accent, beginning at the headline:

                        EVENING TELEGRAPH
                        [Meeting]
                Nationalist Meeting at Ballinrobe.
                        Important Speeches.
                        Main Drainage Scheme.
                         Breezy Discussion.
                 Death of a Well-known Solicitor
                         Mad Cow at Cabra,
                            Literature &.

  --Do you think it requires great ability to live that life
successfully? asked Stephen when they were once more on the way.
  --I suppose you consider literature the most important thing
  --You take up that view of the world, I am sure, out of pure
perversity. You try to prove me abnormal and diseased but it is as
easy to prove that the well-known solicitor was diseased and abnormal.
Insensibility is a mark of disease.
  --He may have been what you would call an artist.
  --Yes, of course . . . And as for the temptation which Satan was
allowed to dangle before the eyes of Jesus it is, in reality, the most
ineffectual temptation to offer to any man of genius. That well-known
solicitor might succumb to it but for Jesus the kingdom of this world
must have been a very empty phrase indeed -- at least when he had
outgrown a romantic youth. Satan, really, is the romantic youth of
Jesus re-appearing for a moment. I had a romantic youth, too, when I
thought it must be a grand thing to be a material Messias: that was
the will of my father who will never be in heaven. But now such a
thought arises in my mind only in moments of great physical weakness.
So I regard that view of life as the abnormal view -- for me. A few
days ago I walked out to Howth for a swim and while I was going round
the side of the Head I had to take a little ribbon of a path that hung
high over the rocks .
  --What side of Howth?
  --Near the Bailey . . . Very good. As I looked down on those rocks
beneath me the thought arose in my mind to cast myself down upon them.
The thought made me shiver with pleasure for a moment but, of course,
I recognised our old friend. All these temptations are of a piece. To
Jesus, to me, to the excitable person who adopts brigandage or suicide
after taking the suggestions of literature too seriously, Satan offers
a monstrous life. It is monstrous because the seat of the spiritual
principle of a man is not transferable to a material object. A man
only pretends to think his hat more important than his head. That view
of life, I consider, is abnormal.
  --You cannot call that abnormal which everyone does.
  --Does everyone jump off the Hill of Howth? Does everyone join
secret societies? Does everyone sacrifice happiness and pleasure and
peace to honour in the world? Father Artifoni told me of a society of
mutual assistance in Italy the members of which had the right to be
thrown into the Arno by their fellow-members on signing a paper
proving that their case was past curing.
  At Noblett's corner where they always halted, they found Temple
declaiming to a little ring of young men. The young men were laughing
very much at Temple who was very drunk. Stephen kept his eyes fixed on
Temple's shapeless mouth which at moments was flecked with a thin foam
as it strove to enunciate a difficult word. Cranly stared at the group
and said:
  --I'll take my dyin' bible Temple has been standing those medicals
drinks . . . The bloody fool! . . .
  Temple caught sight of them and at once broke off his discourse to
come over to them. One or two of the medicals followed him.
  --Good evening, said Temple, fumbling at his cap.
  --<Druncus es>.
  The two medicals laughed while Temple began to search his pockets.
During the search his mouth fell asunder.
  --Who has the money? said Cranly.
  The two medicals laughed and nodded towards Temple who desisted from
his search disconsolately, saying:
  --Ah, by hell, . . . I was going to stand a drink . . . Ah, by hell!
. . . Where's the other bob I had? . . .
  One of the medicals said:
  --You changed it in Connery's.
  The other medical said:
  --He got stuck in his first today. That's why he went on the beer
tonight.
  --And where did you raise the money? said Cranly to Temple, who
began to search his pockets again.
  --He popped his watch for ten bob.
  --It mustn't be a bad watch, said Cranly, if he got ten bob on it.
Where did he get ten bob?
  --Ah no! said the second medical. I popped it for him. I know a chap
named Larkin in Granby Row.
  The big medical student who had had the political discussion in the
<Adelphi> with the clerk from the Agricultural Board Office came over
to them and said:
  --Well, Temple, are you going to take us down to the kips?
  --Ah, blazes, said Temple, all my money's gone . . . Ah, by hell, I
must have a woman . . . By hell, I'll ask for a woman on tick.
  The big student roared laughing and turning to Cranly, against whom
he had a grudge on account of the affair in the <Adelphi> he said:
  --Will you have a woman too if I stand?
  Cranly's chastity was famous but the young men were not quite
impressed by it. At the same time the [little] group did not betray
its opinion by laughing at the big student's invitation. Cranly did
not answer; and so the second medical student said:
  --Mac got through!
  --What Mac? said Cranly.
  --Mac . . . you know . . . the Gaelic League chap. He brought us
down to the kips last night.
  --And had you all women?
  --No . . .
  --What did you go there for?
  --He suggested we'd walk through. Fine tarts there, too. They were
running after us, man: it was fine skit. Ay, and one of them hit Mac
because she said he insulted her.
  --What did he do?
  --I don't know. He said "Gellong, you dirty [whore] hure" or
something like that.
  --And what did Mac say?
  --Said he'd charge her if she followed him any further.
  --Well, I'll stand women all round if Cranly has one, said the big
student who was in the habit of making a single inspiration serve him
for a half-hour's conversation.
  --Ah, by hell, said Temple suddenly, have you heard the new parable
. . . about the monkeys in Barbary? . . . Mar . . . vellous parable .
. . Flanagan told me . . . O, (he said to Stephen) he wants to be
introduced to you . . . wants to know . . . Fine fellow . . . doesn't
care a damn for religion or priests . . . By hell, I'm a freethinker .
. .
  --What is the parable? said Stephen.
  Temple took off his cap and, bareheaded, he began to recite after
the fashion of a country priest, prolonging all the vowels [and]
jerking out the phrases, and dropping his voice at every pause:
  --Dearly beloved Brethren: There was once a tribe of monkeys in
Barbary. And . . . these monkeys were as numerous as the sands of the
sea. They lived together in the woods in polygamous . . . intercourse
. . . and reproduced . . . their species . . . But, behold there came
into Barbary . . . the holy missionaries, the holy men of God . . . to
redeem the people of Barbary. And these holy men preached to the
people . . . and then . . . they went into the woods . . . far away
into the woods . . . to pray to God. And they lived as hermits . . .
in the woods . . . and praying to God. And, behold, the monkeys of
Barbary who were in the trees . . . saw these holy men living as
hermits . . . as lonely hermits . . . praying to God. And the monkeys
who, my dearly beloved brethren, are imitative creatures . . . began
to imitate the actions . . . of these holy men . . . and began to do
likewise. And so . . . they [left their wives] separated from one
another . . . and went away far away, to pray to God . . . and they
did as they had seen the holy men do . . . and prayed to God . . . And
. . . they did not return . . . any more . . . nor try to reproduce
the species . . . And so . . . gradually. . . these po . . . or
monkeys. . . grew fewer and fewer . . . and fewer and fewer . . . And
today . . . there is no monkey in all Barbary.
  Temple crossed himself and replaced his hat while the audience began
to clap their hands together. Just then a policeman moved on the
group. Stephen said to Cranly:
  --Who is this Flanagan?
  Cranly did not answer but followed Temple and his companions,
walking emphatically and saying " 'M, yes" to himself. They could hear
Temple bemoaning his poverty to his companions and repeating snatches
of his parable.
  --Who is this Flanagan? said Stephen again to Cranly.
  --Another bloody fool, said Cranly in a tone which left the
comparison open.
  A few days later Cranly went to Wicklow. Stephen spent his summer
with Maurice. He told his brother what troubles he anticipated when
the college term reopened and together they discussed plans for
living. Maurice suggested that the verses should be sent to a
publisher.
  --I cannot send them to a publisher, said Stephen, because I have
burned them.
  --Burned them!
  --Yes, said Stephen curtly, they were romantic.
  In the end they decided that it would be best to wait until Mr
Fulham made his intentions known. Mrs Daedalus called one day to see
Father Butt. She did not report her interview fully but Stephen
understood that Father Butt had at first prescribed a clerkship in
Guinness's as a solution of the young man's difficult case and, when
Mrs Daedalus had shaken her head incredulously, he had asked to see
Stephen. He had thrown out hints about some new arrangement of the
college which would necessitate new appointments. These hints were fed
upon by Stephen's parents. The next day Stephen called to the college
to see Father Butt.
  --O, come in, my dear boy, said Father Butt when Stephen appeared at
the door of the little uncarpeted bedroom.
  Father Butt began to talk a great deal about general topics, without
saying anything definite but asking Stephen over and over again for an
expression of opinion which was always studiously withheld. The young
man was very much bewildered. At last, after much rubbing of his chin
and many blinkings of the eyes, Father Butt asked what were Stephen's
intentions .
  --Literature, said Stephen.
  --Yes, yes . . . of course . . . but meanwhile, I mean. . . of
course you will continue your course until you have got a degree --
that is the important point.
  --I may not be able, said Stephen, I suppose you know that my father
is unable to . . .
  --Now, said Father Butt joyfully, I'm so glad you've come to the
point . . . That is just it. The question is whether we can find
anything for you to enable you to finish your course here. That is the
question.
  Stephen said nothing. He was convinced that Father Butt had some
offer or suggestion to make but he was determined not to help him in
bringing it out. Father Butt continued blinking his eyes and rubbing
his chin and murmuring to himself "That is the difficulty, you see."
In the end, as Stephen held his peace sacredly, Father Butt said:
  --There might be . . . it has just occurred to me . . . an
appointment here in the college. One or two hours a day . . . that
would be nothing . . . I think, yes . . . we shall be . . . let me see
now . . . It would be no trouble to you . . . no teaching or drudgery,
just an hour or so in the office here in the morning . . .
  Stephen said nothing. Father Butt rubbed his hands together and
said:
  --Otherwise there would be a danger of your perishing . . . by
inanition . . . Yes, a capital idea . . . I shall speak to Father
Dillon this very night.
  Stephen, somewhat taken by surprise though he had anticipated some
such proposal, murmured his thanks and Father Butt promised to send
him a letter in the course of a day or two.
  Stephen did not give a very full account of this interview to his
father and mother: he said that Father Butt had been vague and had
suggested that he should look for tuitions. Mr. Daedalus thought this
a highly practical notion:
  --If you will only keep your head straight you can get on. Keep in
touch with those chaps, I tell you, those Jesuits: they can get you on
fast enough. I am a few years older than you.
  --I am sure they will do their best to help you, said Mrs Daedalus.
  --I don't want their help, said Stephen bitterly.
  Mr Daedalus put up his eyeglass and stared at his son and at his
wife. His wife began an apology:
  --Give it up, woman, he said. I know the groove he has got into. But
he's not going to fool me nor his godfather, either. With the help of
God I won't be long till I let him know what a bloody nice atheist
this fellow has turned out. Hold hard now a moment and leave it to me.
  Stephen answered that he did not want his godfather's help either.
  --I know the groove you're in, said his father. Didn't I see you the
morning of your poor sister's funeral -- don't forget that? Unnatural
bloody ruffian. By Christ I was ashamed of you that morning. You
couldn't behave like a gentleman or talk or do a bloody thing only
slink over in a corner with the hearsedrivers and mutes by God. Who
taught you to drink pints of plain porter, might I ask? Is that
considered the proper thing for an a . . . artist to do?
  Stephen clasped his hands together and looked across at Maurice who
was convulsed with laughter.
  --What are you laughing at? said his father. Everyone knows you're
only this fellow's jackal.
  --Stephen was thirsty, said Maurice.
  --By God, he'll be hungry as well as thirsty one of these days, if
you ask me.
  Stephen gave details of his interview to Maurice:
  --Don't you think they are trying to buy me? he asked.
  --Yes, that's evident. But I'm surprised at one thing . . .
  --What is that?
  --That the priest lost his temper when speaking to Mother. You must
have annoyed the good man a great deal.
  --How do you know he lost his temper?
  --O, he must have when he suggested to her to put you on the books
of a brewery. That gave the show away. Anyhow we can see what right
these men have to call themselves spiritual counsellors of their
flocks . . .
  --Yes?
  --They can do nothing for a case like yours which presents certain
difficulties of temperament. You might as well apply to a policeman.
  --Perhaps his notion was that my mind was in such a state of
disorder that even routine would do it good.
  --I don't think that was his notion. Besides they must all be liars
in that case for they have all expressed great admiration for your
clearness in argument. A man's mind is not in intellectual disorder
because it refuses assent to the doctrine of the Blessed Trinity.
  --By the way, said Stephen, do you notice what understanding and
sympathy exist between me and my parents?
  --Isn't it charming?
  --Yet, there are plenty of people who would consider them my best
friends for having advised me as they have done. It seems absurd to
call them enemies or to denounce them. They want me to secure what
they consider happiness. They would like me to accept anything in the
way of money at whatever a cost to myself.
  --And will you accept?
  --If Cranly were here I know how he would put that question.
  --How?
  --"Of course, you will accept?"
  --I have already told you my opinion of that young gentleman, said
Maurice tartly.
  --Lynch, too, would say "You'd be a damn fool if you didn't take
it."
  --And what will you do?
  --Refuse it, of course.
  --I expected you would.
  --How could I take it? asked Stephen in astonishment.
  --Not well, I suppose.
  The following day a letter arrived for Stephen:

   Dear Mr Daedalus,
     I have spoken to our President re what we discussed a few days
   ago. He is greatly interested in your case and would like to see
   you at the College any day this week between 2 and 3. He thinks
   it may be possible to find something for you such as I suggested
   -- a few hours or so daily -- to enable you to <continue your
   studies>. That is the main point.
                           Sincerely Yours
                                      D. Butt SJ.

  Stephen did not call to see the President but replied to Father Butt
by letter:

   Dear Father Butt,
     Allow me to thank you for your kindness. I am afraid, however,
   that I cannot accept your offer. I am sure you will understand
   that in declining it I am acting as seems best to me and with
   every appreciation of the interest you have shown in me.
                              Sincerely Yours
                                     Stephen Daedalus.

  Stephen spent the great part of his summer on the rocks of the North
Bull. Maurice spent the day there, stretching idly on the rocks or
plunging into the water. Stephen was now on excellent terms with his
brother who seemed to have forgotten their estrangement. At times
Stephen would half clothe himself and cross to the shallow side of the
Bull, where he would wander up and down looking at the children and
the nurses. He used to stand to stare at them sometimes until the ash
of his cigarette fell on to his coat but, though he saw all that was
intended, he met no other Lucy: and he usually returned to the Liffey
side, somewhat amused at his dejection and thinking that if he had
made his proposal to Lucy instead of to Emma he might have met with
better luck. But as often as not he encountered dripping Christian
Brothers or disguised policemen, apparitions which assured him that
whether Lucy or Emma was in question the answer was all one. The two
brothers walked home from Dollymount together. They were both a little
ragged-looking but they did not envy the trim dressed clerks [that]
who passed them on their way home. When they came to Mr Wilkinson's
house they both paused outside to listen for [the] sounds of wrangling
and even when all seemed peaceful Maurice's first questions to his
mother when she opened the door was "Is he in?" When the answer was
"No" they both went down to the kitchen together but when the answer
was "Yes" Stephen only went down, Maurice listening over the banisters
to judge from his father's tones whether he was sober or not. If his
father was drunk Maurice retired to his bedroom but Stephen, who was
untroubled, discoursed gaily with his father. Their conversation
always began:
  --Well (in a tone of extreme sarcasm) might I ask where were you all
day?
  --At the Bull.
  --O (in a mollified tone) . Had a dip?
  --Yes.
  --Well, there's some sense in that. I like to see that. So long as
you keep away from those <canaille> (in a suspicious tone). Sure you
weren't with Knickerbockers or some of those noblemen?
  --Quite sure.
  --That's all right. That's all I want. Keep away from them . . . Was
Maurice with you?
  --Yes.
  --Where is he?
  --Upstairs, I think.
  --Why doesn't he come down here?
  --I don't know.
  --Hm . . . (again in a tone of ruminative sarcasm). By God, you're a
loving pair of sons, you and your brother!
  Lynch pronounced Stephen all the asses in Christendom for having
declined the Jesuits' offers:
  --Look at the nights you could have had!
  --You are a distressingly low-minded person, answered Stephen. After
all I have dinned into that mercantile head of yours you are sure to
come out on me with some atrocity.
  --But why did you refuse? said Lynch.
  The summer was nearly at an end and the evening had grown a little
chilly. Lynch was walking up and down the Library porch with his hands
in his pockets and his chest well protruded. Stephen kept at his side:
  --I am a young man, isn't that so?
  --That -- is -- so.
  --Very well. My entire aptitude is for the composition of prose and
verse. Isn't that so?
  --Let us suppose it is.
  --Very good. I was not intended to be a clerk in a brewery.
  --I think it would be very dangerous to put you in a brewery
 .. sometimes.
  --I was not intended for that: that is enough. I went to this
University day-school in order to meet men of a like age and temper .
. . You know what I met.
  Lynch nodded his head in despair:
  --I found a day-school full of terrorised boys, banded together in a
complicity of diffidence. They have eyes only for their future jobs:
to secure their future jobs they will write themselves in and out of
convictions, toil and labour to insinuate themselves into the good
graces of the Jesuits. They adore Jesus and Mary and Joseph: they
believe in the a infallibility of the Pope and in all his obscene,
stinking hells: they desire the millennium which is to be [al the
season for glorified believers and fried atheists . . . Sweet Lord
Almighty! Look at that beautiful pale sky! Do you feel the cool wind
on your face? Listen to [my] our voices here in the porch -- not
because [it is] they are mine or yours but because they are human
voices: and doesn't all that tomfoolery fall off you like water off a
duck's back?
  Lynch nodded his head and Stephen continued:
  --It is absurd that I should go crawling and cringing and praying
and begging to mummers who are themselves no more than beggars. Can we
not root this pest out of our minds and out of our society that men
may be able to walk through the streets without meeting some old stale
belief or hypocrisy at every street corner? I, at least, will try. I
will not accept anything from them. I will not take service under
them. I will not submit to them, either outwardly or inwardly. A
Church is not a fixture like Gibraltar: no more is an institution.
Subtract its human members from it and its solidity becomes less
evident. I, at least, will subtract myself: and remember that if we
allow a dozen for one's progeny the subtraction of oneself may mean a
loss to the Church of 12n members.
  --Aren't you rather liberal about the progeny? said Lynch.
  --Did I tell you I met Father Healy this evening? asked Stephen.
  --No, where?
  --I was walking along the Canal with my Danish grammar (because I am
going to study it properly now. I'll tell you why later on ) and whom
should I meet but this little man. He was walking right a into the
golden sunset: all his creases and wrinkles were scattered with gold.
He looked at my book and said it was very interesting: he thought it
must be so interesting to know and compare the different languages.
Then he looked far away into the golden sun and all of a sudden --
imagine! -- his mouth opened and he gave a slow, noiseless yawn . . .
Do you know you get a kind of shock when a man does a thing like that
unexpectedly?
  --He'll have something to do shortly, said Lynch pointing to a
little group which was laughing and chatting in the doorway, and
that'll keep him from walking in his sleep.
  Stephen glanced over at the group. Emma and Moynihan and McCann and
two of the Miss Daniels were evidently in high spirits.
  --Yes, I suppose she will do it legitimately one of these days, said
[Lynch] Stephen.
  --I was talking of the other pair, said Lynch.
  --O, McCann . . . She is nothing to me now, you know.
  --I don't believe that, let me tell you.

                            [Text ends]


